Britain, or A chorographicall description of the most flourishing kingdomes, England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the ilands adjoyning, out of the depth of antiquitie beautified vvith mappes of the severall shires of England: vvritten first in Latine by William Camden Clarenceux K. of A. Translated newly into English by Philémon Holland Doctour in Physick: finally, revised, amended, and enlarged with sundry additions by the said author. Britannia. English Camden, William, 1551-1623. Britain, or A chorographicall description of the most flourishing kingdomes, England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the ilands adjoyning, out of the depth of antiquitie beautified vvith mappes of the severall shires of England: vvritten first in Latine by William Camden Clarenceux K. of A. Translated newly into English by Philémon Holland Doctour in Physick: finally, revised, amended, and enlarged with sundry additions by the said author. Britannia. English Camden, William, 1551-1623. Holland, Philemon, 1552-1637. BRITANNIA. SI jactare licet màgnorum munera diuûm, Sibique veris fas placere dotibus; Cur mihi non videar fortunatissima tellus? Digna est malis, bona quae parùm novit sua. Vltima lanigeris animosa est India lucis, Suis superbus est Arabs odoribus. Thuriferis gaudet Panchaia dives arenis; Ibera flumen terra jactat aureum. Aegypto faciunt animos septem ostia Nili, Laudata Rheni vina tollunt accola . Laeta nec uberibus sibi displicet Africa glebis; Haec portubus superbit, illa mercibus: At mihi nec fontes, nec ditia flumina desunt, Sulcive pingues, prata nec ridentia. Foeta viris, foecunda feris, foecunda metallis; Ne glorier, quòd ambiens largas opes Porrigit Oceanus, neu quòd nec amicius ullâ, Coelum, nec aura dulcius spirat plagâ. Serus in occiduas mihi Phoebus conditur undas, Sororque noctes blanda ducit lucidas. Possem ego laudati contemnere vellera Baetis. Vbi villus albis mollior bidentibus? Et tua non nequeam miracula temnere Memphi. Verùm illa màjor, justiorque gloria, Quòd Latiis, quòd sum celebrata Britannia Grails, Orbem vetustas quòd vocarit alterum. For the easier reading of the English-Saxon words in this Booke, I thought good to prefixe heere the Characters of the English Saxon Alphabet. A a b b c c d d E E e e f f g g h h i i l l m m n n o o p p q q r r S S s s t t u u ƿ w X X x x y y AE AE ae ae Ð Th ð th þ th & and {that} that PVELIVS OVIDIVS NASO. Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos Ducit; & immemores non sinit esse sui. THE AVTHOR TO The Reader. I Hope it shall be to no discredite, if I now use againe by way of Preface, the same words with a few more, that I used twentie foure yeares since, in the first edition of this worke. Abraham Ortelius the worthy restorer of Ancient Geographic arriving heere in England, about thirtie foure yeares past, dealt earnestly with mee that I would illustrate this Isle of BRITAINE, or (as he said) that I would restore antiquitie to Britaine, and Britaine to his antiquitie; which was, as I understood, that I would renew ancientrie, enlighten obscuritie, cleare doubts, and recall home Veritie by way of reco∣very, which the negligence of writers and credulity of the common sort had in a manner pre∣scribed and utterly banished from amongst us. A painfull matter I assure you, and more than difficult; wherein what toyle is to be taken, as no man thinketh, so no man believeth but hee that hath made the triall. Neverthelesse how much the difficultie discouraged mee from it, so much the glory of my country encouraged me to undertake it. So while at one and the same time I was fearefull to undergoe the burthen, and yet desirous to doe some service to my Country, I found two different affections, Feare, and Boldnesse; I know not how, conjoyned in me. Notwithstanding by the most gracious direction of the ALMIGHTY, taking INDVSTRY for my consort, I adventured upon it, and with all my studie, care, cogitation, continuall medi∣tation, paine, and travaile I imploied my selfe thereunto when I had any spare time. I made search after the Etymologie of Britain & the first Inhabitants timorously, neither in so doubt∣full a matter have I affirmed ought confidently. For I am not ignorant that the first originals of nations are obscure by reason of their profound antiquitie, as things which are seene very deepe and far remote: like as the courses, the reaches, the confluencies, & the out-lets of great rivers are wel knowne, yet their first fountaines and heads lie commonly unknown. I have suc∣cinctly run over the Romans government in Britain, and the inundation of forraigne people thereinto, what they were, and from whence they came: I have traced out the ancient divisions of these Kingdomes, I have summarily specified the states, and judiciall Courts of the same. In the severall Counties I have compendiously set downe the limits (and yet not exactly by pearch and pole to breed questions) what is the nature of the soile, which were places of grea∣test antiquitie, who have beene the Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Vicounts, Barons, and some of the most signall, and ancient families therein (for who can particulate all?) What I have performed, I leave to men of judgement. But time the most sound and sincere witnes will give the truest information, when envy which persecuteth the living, shall have her mouth stopped. Thus much give me leave to say, that I have in no wise neglected such things as are most ma∣teriall to search, and sift out the Truth. I have attained to some skill of the most ancient Bri∣tish and English-Saxon tongues: I have travailed over all England for the most part, I have conferred with most skilfull observers in each country, I have studiously read over our owne country writers, old and new, all Greeke and Latine authors which have once made mention of Britaine. I have had conference with learned men in other parts of Christendome: I have been diligent in the Records of this Realme. I have looked into most Libraries, Registers, and memorials of Churches, Cities, and Corporations, I have pored upon many an old Rowle, and Evidence: and produced their testimonie (as beyond all exception) when the cause required, in their very own words (although barbarous they be) that the honour of veritie might in no wise be impeached, For all this I may be censured unadvised, and scant modest who being but of the lowest fourme in the schoole of Antiquitie, where I might well have lurked in obscuritie, have ad∣ventured as a scribler upon the stage in this learned age amidst the diversities of relishes both in wit and judgement. But to tell the truth unfainedly, the love of my Country which compris∣seth all love in it, and hath endeared me unto it, the glory of the British name, the advise of some judicious friends hath overmastred my modestie, and (wild I, nild I,) hath enforced me a∣gainst mine own judgment to undergo this burden too heavy for me, & so thrust me forth into the worlds view. For I see judgements, prejudices, censures, reprehensions, obtrectations, de∣tractions, affronts, and confronts, as it were, in battaile array to environ me on every side: some there are which wholly contemne and avile this study of Antiquitie as a back-looking cu∣riositie; whose authority as I do not utterly vilefie, so I do not overprize or admire their judge∣ment. Neither am I destitute of reasons whereby I might approve this my purpose to well bred and well meaning men which tender the glory of their native Country: and moreover could give them to understand that in the studie of Antiquity, (which is alwaies accompanied with dignity, and hath a certaine resemblance with eternity) there is a sweet food of the mind well befitting such as are of honest and noble disposition. If any there be which are desirous to be strangers in their owne soile, and forrainers in their owne City, they may so continue and ther∣in flatter themselves. For such like I have not written these lines, nor taken these paines. Some there be who may object the silly web of my stile, and rough hewed forme of my writing. Verily I acknowledge it, neither have I waied every word in Goldsmiths scales, as Vario commanded, neither purposed I to picke flowers out of the gardens of Eloquence. But why should they object this, when as Cicero the father of Eloquence denieth that this kind of ar∣gument can , that is, be flourished out, and as Pomponius Mela said, is incapable of all Eloquent speech. Many happily will insult over me for that I have adventured to hunt after the originals of names by conjectures, who if they proceed on to reject all conjectures, I feare me a great part of liberall learning and humane knowledge will be utterly out-cast into banishment. For the edge of our understanding is so blunt that we are of necessitie enforced to prosecute many matters in all professions conjecturally. In Physick , , , which are nothing else but conjectures, have their place, and stand in good steed, likewise in Rhetoricke, Civil Law, and other arts they are admitted and allowed. And whereas conjectures are certaine de∣tections of things unknown, and as Fabius termeth them, directions of reason to verity, I have alwaies thought that they were to be accounted among the skuppers wherewith TIME worketh and draweth VERITIE out of Democritus his deepe dungeon. But if these men may be in∣duced to attribute ought to conjectures, I doubt not but my modesty and moderation in con∣jecturing may withall purchase my pardon; Plato in his Cratilus commandeth that we re∣cal the originals of names to the barbarous tongues (for so he called al but Greek) as being most ancient. I thereupon in Etymologies and my conjectures have made recourse to the British, or Welsh tongue (so they now call it) as being the same which the Primitive and most ancient In∣habitants of this land used, and to the English-Saxons tongue which our Progenitors the Eng∣lish spake. He commandeth that the name be consonant to the nature of the thing, & the nature thereof to the name, if they be herein dissonant, I admit them not. In things, saith he, there is , , : that is, but I cannot aptly expresse them, A sound, a forme, and colour, if these discover not themselves in the name I reject the conjecture. As for obscure Etymologies, far fetched hardly wrested, and which may be drawne diversly; I have vouch∣safed them no place it this worke, finally I have beene so sparing and cautelously forecasting in my conjectures that if I be not thought , that is, Happily adventurous, I shall not seeme , that is, Presumptuously audacious. And albeit I have once or twice framed two conjectures in one and the same name, yet I forget not in the meane time that VNITIE is consecrated unto VERITIE. There are some peradventure which apprehend it disdainfully and offensively that I have not remembred this or that family, when as it was not my purpose to mention any but such as were more notable, nor all them truely (for their names would fill whole volumes) but such as hapned in my way according to the method I proposed to my selfe; And with Gods grace I may have a more convenient occasion to deserve well of the Nobilitie and Gentry. But happily they will be most offended herein who have least deserved of their conutry, or overvallew themselves most, or whose Gentry may be but newly blossomed. Of whom yet I protest I would not offend any, and therefore desire and hope their noble natures will not take it offensively upon such causelesse apprehensions. Others will call me in question for that I have commended some persons now living; yet I have done it sparingly, and that out of an assurance of verity, out of the common consent and voice of such as can well judge of worth, & from no base flattery. By these sparing commenda∣tions such as are commended may be lessoned that their deportments may be answerable, and that they preserve and daily increase the same. Succeeding ages, which I respect more than the present, will render to every man his right whatsoever is now scribled in papers. In the meane time I wish them to remember, that to praise good men is but to shew a light of direction as out of a watch towre to posteritie. True is that saying of Symmachus. Imitation is encou∣raged with the seemely praises of the good, and imitating vertue is cherished by the example of others honour. If any say that I have sought occasion to commend some one or other, I confesse it. Neither is well-meaning without leasing to be blamed among the good, and well deserving, friends are not to be forgotten. Howsoever Virtue and Glory hath alwaies op∣posites, and men usually envie the present, and reverence what is past; yet God forbid that we should be so partially injurious as to thinke our times under most worthy Princes to be barrein of praiseworthy persons. As for such as maligne the praise of the good, I feare me least in their owne guiltinesse they may apply the dispraise of the bad to themselves. As for my selfe I sen∣sibly understand that which Plinie intimated to Tacitus in like case. There will bee great offence, and slender thankes, for albeit in the loosenesse of the world, there is much more to be discommended than commended; yet if you commend you shall be taxed as oversparing; if you discommend you shall be censured as overlavish, although you doe the one most compleatly, and the other most moderatly. Some will blame me for that I have omitted this and that towne and Castle, as though I pur∣posed to mention any but such as were most notorious, and mentioned by ancient authours. Nei∣ther verily were it worth the labour once to name them, when as beside the naked name there is nothing memorable. Truly it was my project and purpose to seeke, rake out, and free from darkenesse such places as Caesar, Tacitus, Ptolomy, Antonine the Emperor, Notitia Pro∣vinciarum, and other antique writers have specified and TIME hath overcast with mist and darknes by extinguishing, altering, and corrupting their old true names. In searching & seek∣ing after these, as I will not avouch uncertainties so I doe not conceale probabilities. That I have not found out every one although I have sought after them with painfull & chargeable inquiery let it bee no imputation to mee, as it is not to a Spadiard that worketh in Mines, who while he findeth & followeth the maine vaines, seeth not the hidden small fillets; or that I may use that which Columella did. As it is the commendation of a good Huntsman to find game in a wide wood so it is no imputation if he hath not caught all, and likewise to me, Some things are to be left to the inquisitive diligence of others, Neither, as a learned man said, he teacheth well which teacheth all. An other age, and other men may daily find out more. It is enough for me to have begun, and I have gained as much as I looke for, if I shall draw others into this argument, whether they undertake a new worke or amend this. There are certain, as I heare who take it impatiently that I have mentioned some of the most famous Monasteries and their founders. I am sory to heare it, and with their good favour will say thus much, They may take it as impatiently, and peradventure would have us forget that our ancestours were, and we are of the Christian profession when as there are not extant any o∣ther more conspicuous, and certaine Monuments, of their piety, and zealous devotion toward God. Neither were there any other seed-gardens from whence Christian Religion, and good learning were propagated over this Isle, howbeit in corrupt ages some weeds grew out over∣ranckly. Mathematicians wil accuse me as though I had wholy missed the mark in the Cosmographi∣cal dimentions of longitude, & latitude. Yet heare me I pray you. I have carefully cōferred the Locall tables new & old, Manuscript, and printed, of Oxford & Cambridge, and King Hen∣ry the Fifth. In the latitude they doe not vary much from Ptolomy, but agree wel together, neither do I thereupon imagine with Stadius, that the globe of the earth is removed from his centre, therefore I have relied upon them. But in the Longitude there is no accord, no consent at all. What should I then doe? When as therefore the moderne navigators have observed that there is no variation of the Compasse at the Isles of Asores, I have thence begun with them, the account of Longitude as from the first Meridian, which yet I have not precisely measured. As for obscuritie, fables, extravagant digressions I trust there is no cause to sue out my par∣don. There will be no obscuritie but to them which have not sipped the first elements of Anti∣quitie, and our histories: upon fables I have no waies relied, and that I might not digresse extravagantly. I have had often recourse to the title of my booke (as Pliny adviseth) and eft∣soones demanded of my selfe why I tooke penne in hand. Many have found a defect in this worke that Mappes were not adjoyned, which doe allure the eies by pleasant portr iture, and are the best directions in Geographicall studies, especially when the light of learning is adjoy∣ned to the speechlesse delineations. Yet my abilitie could not compasse it, which by the meanes and cost of George Bishop, and John Norton is now performed out of the labours of Chri∣stopher Saxton, and John Norden, most skilfull Chorographers. But least I should run at randome in my Preface. To accomplish this worke the whole maine of my Industrie hath been imploied for many yeares with a firme setled study of the truth, and sincere antique faithfulnesse to the glory of God and my country. I have done dishonour to no nation, have descanted upon no mans name, I have impaired no mans reputation, I have impea∣ched no mans credit, no not Geffrey of Monmouth whose historie (which I would gladly sup∣port) is held suspected amongst the judicious. Neither have I assumed upon my self any perswa∣sion of knowledge, but only that I have been desirous to know much. And so I right willingly acknowledge that I may erre much, neither will I sooth and smoth my errors. Who shooting all day long doth alwaies hit the mark? Many matters in these studies are raked under deceitfull ashes. There may be some escapes from memory, for who doth so comprehend particularities, in the treasury of his memory, that he can utter them at his pleasure? There may be mistakings in regard of my unskilfulnes, for who is so skilfull that strugling with TIME in the foggie darke sea of Antiquity, may not run upon rocks? It may be that I have been misled by the cre∣dit of authors and others whom I tooke to be most true, and worthy of credit. Neither is there verily (as Pliny saith) any easier slipping from truth, then when a grave Authour war∣ranteth an untruth. Others may be more skilfull and more exactly observe the particularities of the places where they are conversant, If they, or any other whosoever, will advertise mee wherein I am mistaken, I will amend it with manifold thankes, if I have unwitting omitted ought, I will supply it, if I have not fully explicated any point, upon their better information I will more cleere it, if it proceed from good meaning, and not from a spirit of contradiction and quarelling, which doe not befit such as are well bred, and affect the truth. Meane while let your kind courtesie, my industry, the common love of our common mother our native Country, the ancient honour of the British name obtaine so much upon their entreaty, that I may utter my judgement without prejudice to others, that I may proceed in that course that others have for∣merly done in the like argument, and that you would pardon my errors upon my acknowledge∣ment, which may be as well hoped as requested, from good indifferent and reasonable men; so I passe not for the unreasonable, and worser sort which gnaw upon all at tables, carp in conven∣ticles, envy, back-bite, slander, and detract. For I have learned of the Comicall Poet, that slan∣der is the treasure of fooles which they carry in their tongues, and I know for certainty that Envy is seated (I will say it although Envy stood at my elbow) in none but in degenerous, un∣noble, and base minds. The honest good and noble natures as they detest envy, so they cannot envy. As for my selfe, and this worke, I doe most humbly submit it to the censure of the god∣ly honest and learned with all respective reverence of whom if it be not approved, I hope in regard of my professed love to our native Country, that it may be excused. Farwell. TERENTIANVS MAVRVS. Bookes receive their doome according to the Readers capacitie. AD LECTOREM. MAgna per immensum celebrata Britannia mundum Imperio, populo, rege beata suo, Nunc prodit, renovata novis, ornata figuris: Auctior illa tibi, notior illa tibi. Camdeni liber est, satis est dixisse, scienti: Camdenum nescis? perlege, notus erit. GVILIELMVS SYDLEIVS Eques auratur. Ad amicum suum Guil. Camdenum Georgii Buc Equitis aurati Reg. Sp. C. Heptastichon. SI quàm describis terram Camdene Britannam, Tam graphice, tanta curâ, gravitate, fide{que}; Herôum velles Britonum res scribere gestas, (Hac etenim sola neglecti in parte jacemus) Historiae poter at conferri nulla Britannae. Hoc tibi restat opus, vel non hoc fiet in aevo, Secula quòd binos phoenices nulla tulere. Ad Guil. Camdenum, Edw. Grant Sacrae Theologiae Doctor. ERgóne priscorum lustras monumenta virorum, Vt possis facili contexere singula filo, Quae latuere diu caecis immersa tenebris, Antiquata usu, priscum sumptura nitorem? Vnde Britannorum nomen? quo coeperit ortu? Incola quis primus celebres habitaverit oras? In quavis regione doces, quaecunque vetustae Sunt urbes, quae vera simul Comitúm{que} Ducúm{que} Stemmata: quae terrae dotes: quis limes agrorum, Ordine perspicuo perstringis singula plenè. Egregium moliris opus, vel judice Momo, Quod semper praesens, quod postera praedicet aetas; Te patriae stimulavit amor, te docta vetustas Excitat, ut cunctis patriae spatiêris in agris: Multi multa canunt, tu multum scribere tentas, Hoc multo multos superas, qui multa tulerunt. Tu Camdenus eris seros celebrandus in annos: Ergo age, quo tendis gressu, patriám{que} venusta, Ne labor iste tuus desit cupientibus ista. In antiquam Guilielmi Camdeni Britanniam. DE te deque tuo libro dum scribere carmen Mens congesta velit, meritas{que} intexere laudes, Insonuit mea Musa mihi, quid carmina quaeris? Sit scripsisse satis, quod scripsit Horatius olim: Hic meret aera liber Sosiis, hic & mare transit, Et longum noto scriptori prorogat aeuum. I. W. Gen. In postremam Guilielmi Camdeni Antiqui∣tatum editionem, Epigramma. G. Ga. SEmentem sterili quoties tellure recondit, Luditur optatâ fruge colonus iners. Ventifugae nunquam dominus ditescit arenae; Pinguis at irriguo flumine terra beat. Foecundum facunde solum Camdene secasti, Illud & ingenii nobile flumen aquat. At{que} ut opima solet jacto cum semine gleba Parturit innumeris granula adaucta modis: Sic toties cusus tibi qui fuit antè libellus, Cultior antiquo prodiit eccè liber. Heu nusquam tanto respondent arua colono, Cujus ab ingenio prominet his genius? Sume animum. Cùm te hinc discedere jusserit aetas Vt quaeras tritâ pascua laeta viâ; Semper Camdenus simul at{que} Britannia vivent: Longaeuus nequit hic, dum manet illa, mori. In Guilielmi Camdeni Britanniam. NEscia penè sui, generis{que} oblita prioris, Anglia cùm jacuit semisepulta situ, O quis, ait, tantum aut animis, aut arte valebit, Vindice qui tractet vulnera nostra manu? Camdenus patriae lugentis imagine motus Ingenium, artem, animos versat: opem{que} tulit: Mortua restituit veteris cognomina gentis, Mortis & eripuit se patriam{que} metu. Aeternùm per te, Camdene, Britannia vivit, Cum{que} tua aeternùm, tu quoque gente manes. G. Carleton. Ad eundem. QVae vix nota sibi fuit antè Britannia, utri{que} Nunc Camdene, orbi munere nota tuo est, Ignotae{que} velut fuerat non ulla cupido, Sic modò sic notam mundus uterque cupit. Sed tamen incassum: nimia nam dote superba Indignum nullum non sui amoris habet. Ianus Gruterus I.C. Camdeno suo Britannia. CLarus ut Eoas sol quando adverberat arces Et procul invisis ferit astra liventia flammis Nox petit Oceanum, vultus{que} enascitur orbi; Sic Camdêne tuum jubar ut fulgere per Anglos Seu Phoebi coepit, nox fûgit, & hispida dudum, Multum{que} heu squallens radiare Britannia coepi, Non mea nunc Thetis cùm deserit alba profundum Gratior exurgit, pallentes murice vivo Instaurata genas, pigro nec sydus ab Orco, Nec dux astrorum de vertice vesper Olympi, Illa ego quàm limâ repolita Britannia mirâ Fromispicii explicatio. Mî Camdêne tuâ, nova nunc magno Insula ponto: " Illa ego rupe super scuto horrida, & horrida gaeso, " Hinc pelagi numen, dea spicea visitur illinc, " Piscosus vallo Nereus, & classibus armat, " At{que} Ceres flavos spargit sua sertaper agros, " Saxea deinde strues, & quae depicta videmus " Fronte libri, veluti fervens a fontibus unda, " Et surgens pyramis, nostrae miracula monstrant " Telluris, liber nequit (fas) omnia vester: Exero nunc vultus exhaustos antè ruinis, Et nunc flore meo marcores pello vietos, Verùm erit illa dies cùm quae micat Anglia forsa Nebula quaeretur, cinere occultata, situque, Atque alios lychnos dabit: Id Camdêne negat Historicum vincendo Chaos, qui noris abundè: Haec tibi prisca, redux, tua{que} us{que} Britannia canto. Edmundus Bolton. In Britanniam denuò illustratam Ioh. Stradlingus. INsula in Oceano quondam notissima, caecis Delituit tenebris vix benè nota sibi. Ingenii (Camdene) tui radiante tenebras Lumine (seu fugiunt nubila sole) fugas. Sic rediviva viget, nec quà patet illa latere Tu potes: Illam tu, te celebrem illa facit. . , . , . , . . , : . , . H. Cuffius. Ad Guilielmum Camdenum, Britanniam Historica veritate denuò illustrantem. CAMDENE, laus est invidenda, praeclarum Audire civem, patriae que servire. Autoritati, & gloriae perenanti. CAMDENE, dum decus Britanniae campu In aeviternae provehis fagax Famae, Nitore regio stiloque praeclaro: Praeclarus inde civis audis, & jure. Quid? non decore modò Britanniam mactus, Honore mactus ipse & gloriae punctis: Sed hunc & illum luce tua reples mundum: Vt, quae sibi vix nota erat prius terra, Vtramque nunc domum pulsaverit Solis. CAMDENE, laudis hoc tuae est. Et extensum Quò latiùs volat Britanniae nomen: CAMDENE, augustior tantò tibi sacro Adorea in Memoriae exstabit altari. Tam nominis cari est litasse regnorum Famae, inclytasque protulisse virtutes. Caspar Dornavius. D. In Britanniam redivivam Ri. Parker Caio-Gonvil. carmen congra∣tulatorium. SAlve, gratae redis (memoranda Britannia ) terris Quam juvat e tenebris exiliisse tuis: Fallor? an antiquo mutatus sistor in orbe? Aut te dum relego, secla priora lego? Fallor? an Arthuros, Egbertos, Cassibelinos Cerno redivivos ducere castra sua? Fallor? an hîc acies saevae certare solebant? Hîc Offa, hîc rigidus tendere Penda solet? Festino nimium. Quae qualia, quanta{que} cerno Surgere sacra Deo, moenia, templa, domus? Quêis hic Normannis donari praedia legi? Vnde sequens soboles nomen & omen habet. Sed quot cerno domus orbatas stirpe vetusta? Heu quas dilapidant alea, vina, Venus? Vt vidi, ut dolui, novus ut nunc sedibus hospes Diceret: haec mea sunt, ito coloni vetus. Quis Genius talem (veneranda Britannia ) nobis Esse velit reducem? quo duce tanta refers? Scilicet hoc debes Camdeno: agnoscó parentem, Et Genium, cujus te tibi reddit amor. Foelix ipse suo libro: foelicior ipsa Praeconem talem laudis habere tuae. Plus loquar, an sileam? video tantum instar in ipso. Quas Musas vocitem? sed (mea musa) sile. Parcus amor loquitur: major stupefactus adegit Mirari hoc tacitè, nec scio solus, opus: In Britanniam à Guil. Camdene illustratam F. Aderb. Carmen. PIctus atrox Hebridas, glacialem Scotus Hibernem Moverat, Attacotus Vararim, Saxo{que}, Visurgim Conjunctis armis, animis{que} excindere gentes, Subruere eximias cumulatis cladibus urbes, Atque Britannorum nomen demergere bellis. Vt tamen emergant quae sunt immersa ruinis, Et decus antiquum rediviva Britannia cernat, Ecce vetustatem Camdenius eruit omnem, Magnarum rerum scrutatus magna sepulchra, Submovit cineres, nigrantes dispulit umbras: Inque prius retrò studiis se contulit aevum; Contulit atque decus patriaeque sibique labore. In antiquam Camdeni Britanniam. H. N. L. . PRisca Britannorum delevit nomina Tempus Antiquas urbes exitioque dedit. Cuncta triumphato Camdenus tempore reddit, Ingenio priscum restituitque decus. Ingenio cedat Tempus, cedatque vetustas: Ingenium majus Tempore robur habet. Ad eundem. ERrabat quaerens Antiqua Britannia lumen, At, Camdene, tuam vivit ut illa domum: Invenit lumen, mansit, cupiensque poliri; Hospes ait mihi sis, qui mihi lumen eris. I. W▪ In praise of the Translator. CAmden unto the learned did discover, What Holland to the Whol-land doth recite; Who can but read an English Author over, May thereby reape much profit with delight, Viewing the manners, lawes, rites situation, Of his owne native soile, explain'd so well; With all can be desir'd of British Nation, That now Great Britaine hath no Parralell : So richly deck't, that her faire beautious blaze, By matchlesse Art of thine industrious spirit, Adornes the World, like Phoebus golden raies. Thou and thy workes eternall fame doe merit Anagr. Thou Onli-homland-help in admiration, Like that rare Lady beth Mothe now Georg Berkl Phoenix cause of this translation. THOMAS MERIELL Master of Arts. Sonne of the Translator. WHat Camden wrote for profit and delight, Of Brittish Isles, of blessings which have store, In Latian language, for each learned sprite, To reape such fruits as passe Peruvian ore This Holland hath at suit of learned Dame, With paines, transfus'd into our vulgar speach His care of common good, deserves that fame, Which unto late posteritie shall reach. Wherefore all worthy wights which doe take pleasure, To know the stories of their Country sweet, Ought kindly to accept this so great treasure; And yield those thankes to th' Author which are meet. I like his Pen and judgement eke no lesse, For making choice of such a Patronesse. HENRY STANFORD Master of Arts. In honour of the Translator. THe PEN unspoild, though worne beyond a Pen, The HAND unwearied, though with toile opprest: The HEAD diseas'd for ease of Englishmen, (Yet still hold out) in motion heere doe rest. They rest in motion; restlesse nest is that; Yet that's the rest thy Pen, thy Hand, thy Head Deere HOLLAND hath; which all (untir'd) translate The greatest Volumes, greatest Braines have bred. Life being so short as from the Birth to Beere Is but a span; all times may well admire How so much may be onely written here, Where toile makes that short life more soone expire. Had I an Angels tongue, or else a Pen Made of his Pinion (might I judge of thee) I should so speake and write that Gods and Men Should see a Miracle of thee through me. For, NATVRE workes but still to hold her state; And for that worke alone neglecteth all: But thy workes doe her power in thee abate, For others good; that's supernaturall. So th'art a Miracle of Men, for Men; Yet if this Miracle be thought untrue To thy good HEART, from thy Head, Hand, and Pen Give what is right, and then all is but due. To count the Volumes most voluminous, Which thou translated hast with care (past care) And Art (past Art) were but superfluous: For, all doe know them, sith they famous are. NATVRES great Secretarie thou didst teach To speake such English, as (though he be high In cloudy-matter) English eies may reach, His highest Pitch: that tries the Eagles eie. The Roman most renown'd Historian Trajans great MASTER Moralls (boundlesse bookes) Smooth Tranquill, and the rugged Ammian, Thou mad'st as smooth to speake, as Venus lookes. And, for thy last, (but so it cannot be If life doe last, for still thou wilt be doing) Here is a WORKE translated now by thee, For which we long the Learned have beene wooing. In this, through thee, wee see (as in a Glasse) The wrinckled Face of grave ANTIQVITIE: Thy passing Autor here himselfe doth passe Or'e whom thou raign'st while he doth subject lie. Camden, whose Fame nor Seas, nor Lands can bound (Yet they best know him farthest from our ken; For, English least doe know his voices sound) Is made more famous by thy famous Pen For, now the English knowes his worthinesse: His Countrimen now see him as he is: Before, they at his vertue could but guesse; And guesse by Artlesse Aimes, that often misse. Yet, Man of Art, behold! for all this All How thou art subject (that deseru'st to raigne In all mens loves) to hate of great and small, That to be learn'd alone, take envious paine; Who seeke, for Knowledge onely to be knowne: ("For, who know most, are knowne still most of all) They deeme Wit, Folly; that to all is showne; And Goodnesse, Badnesse hold, if generall. Who knows the voice of Envy, theirs doe know; For, Envy speakes but onely by their tongues, Who being a devill speakes (she cares not how) By borrow'd Organs which to them belongs. Alas poore Snakes! (base Envies Instruments) Poore in your Wit, and way-ward in your Will) Yee little learne, so, hate the Ornaments Of Arte in greater Wits of lesser skill. Did ye not doubt your owne defect of Wit You would all Artes should still be showne to all▪ And let the best Wit make best use of it, For Wits renowne, and letters liberall. Yea, you would wish the Babylonian towre Were yet to build, while all one tongue impart▪ That so, sole Wit might be Arts Governour, Not tongues, that are the Essence of no Art. But were yee good, and would all Good should know. Who Envy this more learn'd, lesse-envious man, You would the frankest praise on him bestow That makes th'unlearn'd a learn'd Historian. Shall English be so poore, and rudely-base As not be able (through meere penury) To tell what French hath said with gallant grace, And most tongues else of lesse facunditie? God shield it should; and Heav'n foresend that we Should so debase our owne deere mother-tongue▪ That shewes our thoughts (how ever high they be) With higher tearmes, and el quence among, Then, let me muzzle those so d gged mouthes That byte and barke at what they should defend: They lies doe love, that hidden would have Truthes: And he is Vertues foe that's Errors friend. But, kind Philêmon, let thine active Muse Still mount above these base detracting spirits: Looke not so low as Snakes that men abuse, And highest Fame shall crowne thy lowest merits. Goe forward (maugre backward Envies rabs, That still goe backe) thy paines give others pleasure: They play proud Miriams part, thou Ionada s ▪ They skant our learnings lists, thou giv'st us measure. This Camdens-Britaine, that on wings of Art Flies or'e the World, knowne least where most it ough , There thy free Pen to all doth it impart, And mak'st them learn'd that almost are untaugh . For, Camden (whose all time out-wearing fame, Sith he the learned hath so often gladded) Hath, by thy Pen, now multipli'd his Name: For, now to Camdens Britaine, Holland's added Then, pregnant HOLLAND, Britaine fertile mak ▪ With learnings compost; till the croppe of Art Be ready for our neighbours Sithe, and Rake, That have lesse skill, than will to take our part▪ So shall this soile (when thou art soile or sand) Call Camdens-Britaine, Hollands richest land▪ The unfaired honourer of thee and thine indeavours. JOHN DAVI S of Hereford. BRITAINE. B RITAINE or BRITANNIE, which also is ALBION, named in Greeke , , , , , the most famous Island, without comparison of the whole world; severed from the continent of Europe, by the interflow∣ing of the Ocean, lieth against Germanie and France triangle∣wise; by reason of three Promontories shooting out into divers parts: to wit, BELERIUM, i. the Cape of S. Burien in Corwall, Westward; CANTIUM, i. the Fore-land of Kent, into the East; and TARVISIUM or ORCAS, i. the point of Catnesse in Scotland, Northward. On the West side, whereas Ireland is seated, VERGIVIUS, i. the Westerne Ocean, breaketh in; From the North, it hath the most vast and wide Hyperborean sea beating upon it; On the East, where it coasteth upon Germanie, enforced sore it is with the Germane sea; and Southward, as it lieth opposite to France, with the British. Disjoyned from those neighbour-countries all about by a convenient distance every way, fitted with commodious and open havens, for traffique with the universall world, and to the ge∣nerall good, as it were, of mankind, thrusting it selfe forward with great desire from all parts into the sea. See in KENT. For betweene the said Fore-land of Kent and Calais in France it so advanceth it selfe, and the sea is so straighted, that some thinke the land there was pierced through, and received the seas into it, which before-time had beene excluded: For the maintenance of which their conceit, they alleage both Virgil in that verse of his, Et penitus toto divisos orbe Britannos: And Britans people quite disjoyn'd from all the world besides. Because Britaine, saith Servius Honoratus, was in times past joyned to the maine. And also Claudian, who in imitation of him wrote thus: —Nostra deducta Britannia mundo. Britaine, a land, which severed is from this our [Roman] world. Cer es, that the outward face and fashion of this globe of Earth hath beene with the inundation of Noahs flood, as also by other causes altered; that some mountaines thereby increased in heighth, many places higher than others, setled low, and became even plaines and valleys; that waterie washes were dried up, and drie grounds turned to be standing waters; yea, and that certaine Islands have beene violently broken off from the firme land, carrieth some likelihood of truth. But whether the same be true indeed, or whether there were any Islands at all before the Deluge, it is not my pur∣pose here to argue; neither take I pleasure, without good advisement, of Gods works to give my doome. That the providence of God hath ordained divers things to one and the same end, who knoweth not? and verily, that parcels of the earth dispersed here and there within the sea, serve no lesse to adorne the world, than lakes spred up∣on the earth and hilles raised aloft, aswell Divines as Philosophers have alwaies held. Livius and Fabius Rusticus have likened the forme heereof unto a Scutula h∣longae. long dish or Bipenni. See the Annotati∣ons of Sir. Hen. Savil , knight, upon this place in T citu . two edged axe, and so is it shapen indeed toward the South, as saith Tacitus, where∣upon the fame went of the whole. But Northward, that huge and enorme tract of ground running beyond unto the furthermost point, groweth narrow and sharpe like a wedge, So large, and of such exceeding greatnesse in circuit, they in olde time tooke it to bee, The Panegy∣ricke Orati∣on pronoun∣ced unto Cō∣stantius, and untruly enti∣tuled unto Maximian. that Caesar, hee who first of all the Romans, discovered it, wrote, How he had found out another world; supposing the same so great, as that it seemed to containe within it the Ocean, and not to be compassed about therewith: and Iulius Solinus Polyhistor hath left in writing, that for the largenesse thereof it deserveth Well neere the name of a second world. Howbeit, this age of ours hath now at length by many and sundry voyages, found out in some sort the true dimension and just compasse of the whole Isle, For, from the point Tarvision unto the cape Belerium, the reaches and crooked turnings of the sea-banks along the West considered, there are reckoned much about DCCCXII miles: from thence, keeping the sea side, as it bendeth Southward untill you come to the Fore-land of Kent, CCCXX miles: whence coasting by the Germane sea, with crooked creeks and inlets for DCCIIII miles, it reacheth to the foresaid point Tarvisium: so that by this reckoning the whole Iland taketh in compasse MDCCCXXXVI miles. Which measure as it commeth farre short of Plinies, so is it al∣so somewhat lesse than Caesars. As for Schitinius Chius, I have no reason once to name him, who having in Apollonius among other wonders tolde us strange tales of fruits growing in Britaine without kernels, and of grapes without stone and seed, hath bounded it within the precinct of CCC stadia and no more. Much better yet hath Dionysius After in his Description of the world, reported of the British Ilands that is to say, Britaine and Ireland in this wise, . Now, for their greatnesse verily, exceeding large they are; And seeke through Ilands all, none may with Brittish Isles compare. And toget with him, Aristides and other Greeke writers accord, who by way of excellenc truly called Britaine for the greatnesse thereof , that is, The great I' . Now, they that have more curiously compared the spaces of heaven above, toge∣ther with the tracts of earth beneath, place Britaine under the 8. Climate, and include it within the 18. and 26 Parallel. They thinke also the longest day there, to be 18. Ae∣quinoctiall houres and an halfe. But the Cape of Cornwall, respecting the convexi∣tie of the earth, they describe to be situate 16 degrees & 50 scruples from the furthest point West: the longitude likewise of the Fore-land in Kent, to be 21. degrees; as for the latitude, in the south-coast they measure it by 50 degrees, and that of Catnesse Northward. by 59 & 40 scruples over. So that, according to this site, Britaine is seated aswell for aire as soile, in a right fruitfull and most milde place. The aire so kinde and temperate, that not only the Summers be not excessive hote, by reason of continuall gentle windes that abate their heat (which as they refresh the fruits of the earth, so they yeeld a most holsome and pleasing contentment both to man and beast) but the Winters also are passing milde: For, the raine falling often with still showers, (to say nothing of the aire it selfe somewhat thicke and grosse) dissolveth the rigour of the cold so; and withall the sea which compasseth it, with moderate warmth doth com∣fort the land in such wise, as that the cold with us is much more remisse than in some parts of France and Italie. Whereupon it is, that Minutius Foelix, proving that God by his providence hath a speciall regard of the severall parts of the world as well as of the whole, saith, That Britaine though it want other whiles the aspect of the Sunne, yet refreshed it is with the warmth of the sea flowing round about it. Neither neede you to marvell at his speech, concerning the warmth of the sea. The seas, quoth Cicero, stir∣red to and fro with the winds, e natura De∣orum, lib. 2. do so wax warme, that a man may easily perceive, within that world of Waters there is inclosed a certaine heat. To the temperatenesse also of this Iland Cescenius Getulicus a very ancient Poet seemeth to have respect, when he versified thus of Britaine; Non Illîc Aries verno ferit aëra cornu, Probus in Vir∣gilij G gie. Gnosia nec Gemini praecedunt cornua Tauri, Sicca Lycaonius resupinat plaustra Bootes. The Aries. RAM unkindly smites not there, in Spring, the aire with horn, Nor Gemini. TWINS, the horned Taurus. BULL of Crete, untimely go beforn, Where DRIVER, Bootes, other∣wise called Arctophylax. hight Arctophylax, doth his drie waine up-turn. Caesar likewise writeth thus; The places in Britaine be more temperate (by reason that the weather is not so cold) than in France. Semblably Cornelius Tacitus; No extremitie there is of cold: and hee addeth moreover, and saith, The soile, setting aside the Olive, the Vine, and the rest, which are Vsually grow in hot∣ter counries. proper to warmer countries, taketh all kind of graine, and beareth it in abundance: it ripeneth slowly, but commeth up quickly: the cause of both, is one and the same, to wit, the overmuch moisture of ground and aire. For the aire, as Strabo writeth, is subject rather to showres of raine, than to snow. Howbeit, the ground enriched so with all sorts of corne, that Orpheus hath reported it to bee the very seat of Ladi Ceres: for, that which we read in his Poeme thus, — ,— —Lo, heere, the stately hauls Of Ceres Queene.— is meant of this our Island: yea, and it hath beene the very barne, garner, and store∣house of victuals of the West Empire; Zosimus. Eustachius . from whence the Romans were wont yearely to transport into Germanie, with a fleet of 800. vessels bigger than barges, great store of corne, for the maintenance of their armies, which there defended the Frontiers. But lest I should seeme to exceed over-much in the praise of my native country, heare in stead of me, that ancient Oratour, who with open mouth resoundeth out the com∣mendations thereof, in this manner: O happie Britaine, and more fortunate than all other lands beside, Panegyrie to Constantius. which first sawest Constantine Emperour! for good cause hath nature endowed thee with all the blessed gifts of aire and soile; wherein there is neither excessive cold of Win∣ter, nor extreme heat of Summer; wherein there is so great plenty of graine, that it serveth sufficiently both for bread and drink: wherein the forrests are without savage beasts, and the ground void of noysome serpents. Contrariwise, an infinite multitude there is of tame cattell with udders strutting full of milke, and loaden with fleeces: and verily, (that which for the use of our life we much esteemed) the daies there are very long, and the nights never want some light, whiles those utmost plaines by the sea side cast and raise no sha∣dowes on high, and the aspect both of skie and starres passeth beyond the bound of the night, yea the very Sunne it selfe, which unto us seemeth for to set, appeareth there, onely to passe a∣long and goe aside. Hearken also, if it please you, to another Oratour speaking unto Constantius the fa∣ther of Constantine the Great in this wise: Panegyri , to Constantius. And, I assure you, no small dammage was it to the Common-weale, as to lose the bare name onely of BRITAINE, so to forgoe a land so plen∣tifull in corne, so rich in pasturage, so full of mines and veines of mettall, so gainefull in tributes and revenewes so accommodated with many havens, and for circuit, so large and spacious. Moreover, the singular love and motherly affection of Nature to this Island, a Poet of good antiquitie hath by way of a speech made unto Britaine lively expressed thus, in this Epigram, which some have judged not unworthy to be divulged. Tu nimio nec stricta gelu, nec sydere fervens, Clementi coelo temperiéque places, Cùm pareret Natura parens, varióque favore Divideret dotes omnibus una locis, Seposuit potiora tibi, matreque professa, Insula sis foelix, plenáque pacis, ait. Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid desiderat usus, Ex te proveniet, vel aliunde tibi. For aire, so mild and temperate right pleasing is thy seat; Where reigneth neither chilling cold, nor yet excessive heat. What time Dame Nature brought things forth, and of her onely grace, Bestow'd her favours manifold and gifts on every place; Like mother kinde, the better part aside for thee she laid; Oh, happie Island maist thou be and full of peace, she said: What ever vaine excesse affects, what may mans need content, Shall come from thee, or else to thee, from other lands be sent. Fortunate Islands. This plentifull abundance, these goodly pleasures of Britain, have perswaded some, that those fortunate Islands, wherein all things, as Poets write, do still flourish as in a perpetuall Spring tide, In his Com∣mentaries upon Lyco∣phron. were sometime heere with us. For, this, doth one Isacius Tzet∣zes a Greek Author of no small credit, affirme, and our ancestours seeme to have be∣lieved the same as a certaine truth. For, what time as Pope Clement the sixth, as wee read in Robert of Aevsburie, 1344. had elected Lewis of Spaine, to bee the Prince of those fortunate Islands, and for to aid and assist him, mustered souldiers in France and Italie; our countrymen were verily perswaded, That hee was chosen Prince of Brit ine, and that all the said preparation was for Britaine, as one, saith he, of the fortunate Islands. Yea and even those most prudent personages themselves, our Legier Embassadours there, with the Pope, were so deeply setled in this opinion, that forthwith they with∣drew themselves from Rome, and hastned with all speed into England, there to certifie their countreymen and friends of the matter. Neither will any man now judge other∣wise, who throughly knoweth the blessed estate and happie wealth of Britaine. For Nature tooke a pleasure in the framing thereof, and seemeth to have made it as a se∣cond world, sequestred from the other, to delight mankind withall, yea and curiously depainted it of purpose, as it were a certaine portraict, to represent a singular beautie, and for the ornament of the universall world: with so gallant and glittering variety, with so pleasant a shew are the beholders eies delighted, which way soever they glance. To say nothing of the Inhabitants, whose bodies are of an excellent good con∣stitution, their demeanour right courteous, their natures as gentle, and their courage most hardie and valiant, whose manhood by exploits atchieved both at home and a¦broad, is famously renowned thorow the whole world. The first In∣habitants: and reason of the Name. But who were the most ancient and the very first Inhabitants of this Isle, as also, from whence this word Britan had the originall derivation, sundry opinions one after another have risen; and many we have seene, who being uncertaine in this point, have seemed to put downe the certaine resolution thereof. Neither can we hope to attaine unto any certaintie heerein, more than all other nations, which) setting those aside that have their originall avouched unto them out of holy Scripture) as well as wee, touching their point, abide in great darkenesse, errour and ignorance. And how, to speake truly, can it otherwise be? considering that the trueth, after so many revoluti∣ons of ages and times, could not chuse but be deepely hidden. For the first inhabitours of countreys had other cares and thoughts to busie and trouble their heads, than to deliver their beginnings unto posteritie. And say, they had been most willing so to do, yet possibly could they not, seeing their life was so uncivill, so rude, so full of warres, and therefore void of all literature; which keeping companie with a civill life, by peace and repose, is onely able to preserve the memorie of things, and to make over the same to the succeeding ages. Moreover the Druidae, who being in the olde time the Priests of the Britans and Gaules, were supposed to have knowne all that was past; & the Bardi, that used to resound in song all valours and noble acts, thought it not law∣full to write and booke any thing. But admit they had recorded ought; in so long continuance of time, in so many and so great turnings and overturnings of States, doubtlesse the same had beene utterly lost, seeing that the very stones, pyramides, obe∣lisks, and other memorable monuments, thought to be more durable than brasse, have yeelded long agoe to the iniquitie of time. Howbeit, in the ages soone after follow∣ing, there wanted not such as desired gladly to supplie these defects; and when they could not declare the trueth indeed, yet at least way for delectation, they laboured to bring foorth narrations, devised of purpose, with certaine pleasant varietie to give contentment, and delivered their severall opinions, each one after his owne conceit and capacitie, touching the originall of Nations and their names. Unto which, as, there were many, who neglecting further search into the trueth, quickly yeelded con∣nivence; so, the most sort delighted with the sweetnesse of the Deviser, as readily gave credence. But, to let passe all the rest, one Geffrey Ap Arthur, of Monmouth among us (whom I would not pronounce in this behalfe liable to this suspicion) in the raigne of K. Henrie the Second, published an Historie of Britaine, and that out of the British tongue, as hee saith himselfe: wherein he writeth, That Brutus a Trojane borne, the sonne of Silvius, nephew of Ascanius, and in a third degree nephew to that great Aeneas descended from supreame Jupiter, (for the goddesse Venus▪ bare him) whose birth cost his mother her life, and who by chance slew his owne father in hunting, (a thing that the wise Magi had foretold) fled his country and went into Greece; where he delivered out of thraldome the progenie of Helenus K. Priamus sonne, vanquish∣ed King Pandrasus, wedded his daughter, and accompanied with a remnant of Tro∣jans, fell upon the Island Leogetia: where by the Oracle of Diana, he was advised to goe into this Westerne Isle. From thence through the Streights of Gebraltar, where he escaped the Mer-maydes, and afterward through the Tuskan sea, hee came as farre as to Aquitaine, Brute. Aquitaine, in a pight battell defeated Golfarius the Pict, King of Aqui∣taine, together with twelve Princes of Gaul; and after he had built the citie Vrbem Tu∣ronum. Tours (as witnesseth Homer) and made spoile of Gaule, passed over sea into this Island inhabited of Giants, In the yeare of the world, 2855. Before the Nativitie of Christ, 1108. whom when he had conquered, together with Gogmagog the hugest of them all, according to his owne name he called it Britaine, in the yeare of the world 2855: before the first Olympiad 334. yeares; and before the nativitie of Christ 1108. Thus farre Geffrey [of Monmouth]. Yet others there bee, that fetch the name of Britaine from some other causes. Sir Thomas Eliot, by degree a wor∣shipfull Knight, and a man of singular learning, draweth it from the Greeke foun∣taine, to wit, , a tearme that the Athenians gave to their publike Finances or Revenues. Humfrey Lhuyd, reputed by our countrymen, for knowledge of Antiqui∣tie, to carrie, after a sort, with him all the credit and authoritie, referreth it confidently to the British word PRID-CAIN, that is to say, a pure white forme. Pomponius Laetus reporteth, that the Britons out of Armorica in France, gave it that name. Goropius Becanus saith, that the Danes sought heere to plant themselves, and so named it BRIDANIA, that is, Free Dania. Others derive it from PRVTENIA, a region in Ger∣manie. Bodine supposeth, that it tooke the name of BRETTA the Spanish word, which signifieth Earth: and Forcatulus, of BRITHIN, which, as wee read in Athe∣naeus, the Greeks used for drinke. Others bring it from the BRVTII in Italy, whom the Graecians called . As for those smatterers in Grammar, who keepe a bab∣bling and prating that Britaine should carry that name, of British manners, let them be packing. These are all the opinions (to my knowledge) that have beene received touching the name of Britaine. But heerein, as wee cannot but smile at the fictions of stran∣gers, so the devices coined by our owne countrymen passe not currant with generall allowance. And verily, in these and such like cases, an easier matter it is to impeach the false, than to teach and maintaine a truth. For besides this, that it were an absur∣ditie to seeke the reason of this name in a forrein language; the generall consent of all Historiographers of better note, doth confute Laetus; who with one accord deliver unto us, that those Armorica Britons departed hence, and so from us carried the name with them. Againe, Britaine flourished under this name many hundred yeares before the names of Dania and Prutenia came up, But what doth the word Britan∣nia to doe with the Spaniards Bretta? which I doubt, whether it be Spanish or no: and why should this Island be so termed, rather than other Land? That the drinke called Brithin was ever in use among our countrymen, can hardly be proved: and to give name to our nation of the Greekes drinke, were ridiculous. As for those Brutii in Italy, whom as Strabo witnesseth, the Lucans called , as one would say, traiterous fugitives, it can never be prooved, that they like runnagates ranne hither into Britaine. But to come now to our owne countrimens conjectures. Eliots seemeth not probable; seeing that word was proper to the Athenians; and consi∣dering the Greeks called this Isle , not , Lhuyds Prid-Cain for the Britan, seemeth not onely too farre fetched, but also over-hardly streined: to say nothing, how that word, Cain, came from the Latines Candidum, and so crept into the pro∣vinciall language of the Britaines. But as touching those reports of Brutus ; were they true, certaine, and undoubted, there is no cause why any man should bestow farther study and labor in searching out the beginning of the Britaines: The thing is dispatched to our hand, and the search∣ers of Antiquitie are eased of their troublesome and painfull travell. For mine owne part, it is not my intent, I assure you, to discredit and confute that story which goes of him, for the upholding whereof, (I call Truth to record) I have from time to time streined to the heighth, all that little wit of mine. For that were, to strive with the streame and currant of time; and to struggle against an opinion commonly and long since received. How then may I, a man of so meane parts, and small reckoning, be so bold, as to sit in examination of a matter so important, and thereof definitively to determine? Well, I referre the matter full and whole to the Senate of Antiquari∣ans, for to be decided. Let every man, for me, judge as it pleaseth him; and of what opinion soever the Reader shall be of, verily I will not make it a point much material. And yet I see (that I may tell you so much aforehand, beeing as I am a plaine ho∣nest and diligent searcher after the truth) how men most judicious and passing well learned, goe about divers waies to extenuate the credit of this narration; and so of∣ten as I stand in defence thereof, to come upon me fiercely with these and such like arguments. First, grounding their reason upon the time, they protest and say, that all is but fabulous (with reservation onely of the Sacred Historie ) whatsoever is repor∣ted to have beene done before the first Olympias, to wit, the yeare 770. before the birth of Christ: like as these reports of Brutus, which are before the said time 300. yeares and more. And this they averre by the authoritie of Varro, the most learned writer of all the Romans: who as he named the first age immediately after mans cre∣ation unto the Deluge, Censorium. , that is, uncertaine, by reason of the ignorance there∣of, so he termed the second, even from the said Deluge unto the first Olympias, , that is to say, The Fabulous Time or Age. Fabulous: because in that time there is related nothing else (for the most part) but tales, even among the Greekes and Latines, learned nations; much more then among the Barbarous and unlettered, such as in those daies they were in all this tract, every one. Then they alleage, that for the confirmation of this matter in questi∣on, the authoritie of sufficient writers, (which to the knowledge of things past ma∣keth most, and is all in all) is altogether defective. Now, those they call sufficient wri∣ters, whose antiquitie and learning the greater it is, so is their credit the better accep∣ted, who all of them, like as the ancient Britaines themselves (by their saying) knew not so much as the name of Brutus. Caesar, say they, sixteene hundred yeares since, as he testifieth of himselfe, By all the enquirie that he could make, found no more but this, that the in land part of Britaine was inhabited by those, who, said they, were borne in the very Island; and the maritime coasts by such as from out of At this day called Ne∣ther-lands, or Low coun∣tries of Ger∣manie. Belgium passed over thither. Tacitus also, a thousand and foure hundred yeares agoe, who searched diligently in∣to these particulars, wrote thus, What manner of men the first inhabitants of Britain were, borne in the land or brought in, as among barbarous people it is not certainely knowne. Gildas, being himselfe a wise and learned Britaine, who lived a thousand yeares since, hath not one word of this Brutus, and doubteth whether the old Britaines had any records or writings, whereby they might convey unto posteritie, their own beginning and Historie; professing that he wrote, by the relation which hee had from beyond-sea, and not by any direction out of the writings of his owne country, or any records left by writers: which if there were ever any at all, either the enemies had burnt them, or else they were carried away farre off in some fleet of exiled persons, and so not extant. Ninius also, disciple of Eluodugus, taking in hand to write a Chronicle, eight hundred yeares agoe, complaineth that the great Masters and Doctors of Britaine, had no skill, and left no memoriall in writing: confessing, that himselfe gathered whatsoever hee wrote out of the Annals and Chronicles of the holy Fathers. To these they adjoyne Beda, William of Malmesburie, and as many as wrote eleven hundred and threescore years since, who seeme not once to have heard of Brutus his name; so silent are they of him in all their owne writings. Hereupon they have noted, that the name of that Brutus was never heard of in the world, before that in a barbarous age, and amid the thickest clouds of igno∣rance, one Hunibald a bald writer, fabled and feined, That Francio a Trojane, King Priams sonne, was the founder of the French Nation. Hence they collect, that when our country-men heard once how the French-men their neighbours drew their line from the Trojanes, they thought it a foule dishonour, that those should out∣goe them in nobilitie of Stocke, whom they matched every way in manhood and proesse. Therfore, that Geffrey Ap Arthur of Monmouth, foure hundred yeares ago, was the first, as they thinke, that to gratifie our Britans produced unto them this Bru∣tus, descended from the gods, by birth also a Trojane, to bee the author of the British Nation. And before that time verily not one man, as they say, made any mention at all of the said Brutus. They adde thus much moreover, that about the same time, the Scotish writers falsely devised Scota the Egyptian Pharaoes daughter to bee the Foundresse of their nation. Then also it was, that some misspending their wit and time, yea and offring violent abuse unto the truth, forged out of their owne braines, for the Irish, their Hiberus ; for the Danes, their Danus ; for the Brabanders, their Brabo ; for the Goths, their Gothus ; and for the Saxons, their Saxo ; as it were the Stock-fathers of the said nations. But seeing that in this our age, which hath escaped out of those darke mists of fatall ignorance, the French have renounced their Francio as a counterfeit Proge∣nitor: (Whereas the Frenchmen, quoth Turnibus a right learned man, stand highly upon their descent from the Trojanes, they doe it in emulation of the Romans, whom they seeing to beare themselves proud of that Pedigree and noble stocke, would needs take unto themselves also the like reputation: ) And for that the Scots, such as be of the wiser sort, have cast off their Scota; and truth it selfe hath chased away Hiberus, Danus, Brabo, and the rest of these counterfeit Demi-gods, and Worthies of the same stampe: Why the Britans should so much sticke unto their Brutus, as the name-giver of their Island, and to the Trojane originall, they greatly wonder: as who would say, before the de∣struction of Troy, (which happened in the thousand yeare or there about after Noahs floud) there had beene no Britaines heere: and as if there had not lived many valo∣rous men before Agamemnon. Furthermore, they avouch, that very many out of the grave Senate of great Clerks, by name, Boccace, Vives, Hadr. J nius. Polydore, Buchanan, Vigneier, Ge∣nebrard, Molinaeus, Bodine, and other men of deepe judgement, agree joyntly in one verdict, and denie, that ever there was any such in the world as this Brutus: also, that learned men of our owne country, as many, acknowledge him not, but reject him as a meere counterfet. He flourished in the yeare 1440. Among whom, they produce, first John of Weathamsted, Abbat of S. Albanes, a most judicious man; who in his Granarie wrote of this point long since in this manner: According to other histories, which in the judgment of some are of more credit, the whole Discourse of this Brutus is rather Poeticall than histo∣ricall, and, for divers reasons, built upon opinion more than truth indeede. First, because their is no where mention made in the Roman stories, either of killing the father, or of the said birth, or yet of putting away the sonne. Secondly, for that, after sundry authors, As∣canius begat no such sonne who had for his proper name Sylvius: for, according unto them, he begat but one onely sonne, and that was Iulus, from whom the house of Iulii after∣wards tooke their beginning &c. And thirdly, Sylvius Posthumus, whom perhaps Geffrey meaneth, was the sonne of Aeneas by his wife Lavinia; and hee begetting his sonne Aeneas in the eight and thirtieeh yeare of his reigne, ended the course of his life by naturall death. The Kingdome therefore, now called England, was not heeretofore, as many will have it, named Britaine of Brutus the sonne of Sylvius. Wherefore, it is in their opinion a vaine peice of worke, and ridiculous enough, to challenge noble bloud, and yet to want a probable ground of their challenge. For it is not manhood only, that ennobleth a nation; the mind it is also with perfect understanding, and nothing else, that gaineth gentilitie to a man. And there∣fore Seneca writeth thus, in his Epist. 44. Epistles out of Plato▪ That there is no King but hee came from slaves, and no slave but hee descended of Kings. Wherefore, to conclude, let this suffice the Britaines from the beginning of their Nobilitie, that they bee couragious and valiant in fight, that they subdue their enemies on every side, and that they utterly refuse the yoke of ser∣vitude. In a second rancke they place William of Newborough a writer of much greater authoritie, who too too sharply charged Geffrey the Compiler of the British history, for his untruth, so soone as ever it came forth, in these words: A certaine writer quoth he, in these our daies hath risen up, who deviseth foolish fictions and tales of the Britaines, and in a vaine humour of his owne, extolleth them farre above the valorous Macedonians and Romans both: he hath to name Geffrey, and is surnamed Arthurius, for that the tales of Arthur taken out of the Britaines old fables, and augmented by inventions of his owne, with a new colour of Latine speech laid over them, hee hath invested into the goodly title of an Historie. who also hath adventured farther, and divulged under the name of authentike prophesies, grounded upon an undoubted truth, the deceitfull conjectures and foredeemings of one Merline, whereunto hee added verily a great deale of his owne, whiles hee did the same into Latine. And a little after: Moreover, in his booke which he entituleth, The Bri∣tans Historie; how malapertly and shamelesly hee doth in manner nothing but lie, there is no man that readeth the said booke can doubt, unlesse hee have no knowledge at all of ancient histories. For, hee that hath not learned the truth of things indeede, admitteth without dis∣cretion and judgement the vanitie of fables. I forbeare to speake, what great matter tha fellow hath forged of the Britans acts, before the Empire, and comming in of Julius Caesar, or else being by others invented, hath put them downe as authentike. In somuch, as Giral∣dus Cambrensis, Descript. Cam∣briae. c. 7. who both lived and wrote at the same time, made no doubt to terme it, The fabulous story of Geffrey. Others there bee, who in this narration of Brutus, laugh at the foolish Topographie set downe by this Geffrey; as also how falsly hee hath produced Homer as a witnesse: yea, and they would perswade us, that it is wholly patched up of untunable discords and jarring absurdities. They note besides, that his writings, together with his Merlins prophesies, are (among other books pro∣hibited) forbidden by the church of Rome to be published. Some againe doe observe thus much; how these tha most of all admire Brutus, are very doubtfull and waver to and fro about their . He, say they, that taketh upon him the name and person of Gildas, and briefe glos es to Ninius, deviseth first, that this Brutus was a Consul of Rome; then, that hee was the sonne of Silvius, and lastly, of one Hessicio. And there wanteth not (as I have heard say) a certaine Count-Palatine, who needs have our Brutus to be called Brotus, because, forsooth, in his birth he was the cause of his mothers death, as if sounded so much in Greeke. In the judgement of others, they should have left the Originall of Britaines as probable, if they had fathered their progenie, either upon Brito the Centaure, whom Hinginus mentioneth; Bretanus. or that Bretanus, of whose daughter Celtice, Parthenius Nicaeus a very ancient authour, writeth that Hercules begat Celtus, the father of the Celtae, and from whom Hesychius deriveth the word Britaine. As for these observations and judgements of other men, which I have recited, I beseech you, let no man commence action against mee, a plaine meaning man, and an ingenuous student of the truth, as though I impeached that narration of Brutus; forasmuch as it hath been alwaies (I hope) lawfull for every man in such like matters, both to thinke what he will, and also to relate what others have thought. For mine owne part, let Brutus be taken for the father, and founder of the British nation; I will not be of a contrary mind. Let the Britaines resolve still of their originall, to have proceeded from the Trojans (into which stocke, as I will hereafter prove, they may truely ingraffe themselves) I will not gain-stand it. I wot full well, that Nations in old time for their originall, had recourse unto Hercules, & in later ages, to the Tro∣jans. Let Antiquitie herein be pardoned, Livius. if by entermingling falsities and truthes, humane matters and divine together, it make the first beginnings of nations and cities more noble, sacred, and of greater majestie: seeing that, as Plinie writeth, Even falsely to claime and challenge descents from famous personages, implieth in some sort a love of virtue. As for my selfe, I willingly acknowledge with Varro, the best learned of all Romans, Augustinus d Civitate Dei. lib. 3. cap. 4. such originals as these, fetched from the gods, to be profitable; that valorous men may believe, although untruly, that they are descended from the gods, and thereby the mind of man assuredly perswaded of some divine race, may presume to enterprize great mat∣ters more boldly, act the same more resolutely, and upon the very securitie thereof, performe all more happily. By which words neverthelesse, S. Augustine gathereth, that the said most learned Varro confesseth (although not stoutly nor confidently, yet covertly) that these opinions are altogether truthlesse. Forasmuch then, as all writers are not of one and the same mind, as touching the very name and the first inhabitants of Britaine, and I feare me greatly, that no man is able to fetch out the truth, so deepely plunged within the winding revolutions of so many ages, let the Reader of his candor and humanitie, pardon mee also among others, if modestly and without the prejudice of any man, I likewise interpose my conjecture; not upon any mind I have contentiously to wrangle, (be that farre from mee) but in my desire to search out the truth; which hath wholly possessed me and brought to this point, that in the question now in hand, I had rather aske forgive∣nesse for my fault (if there be any) than commit no fault at all. Howbeit, to the end that the reason of this name, may if it be possible, more easily and with better suc∣cesse appeare, I will endeavour first (as I may) to find out the most ancient Inhabi∣tours of the Island, albeit they lie so hidden in the utmost nooke and secretest closer of Antiquitie, as it were in a most thicke wood, where no pathwaies are to bee seene, that very small hope there is or none at all, to fetch those things backe againe with all my diligence, which oblivion hath so long removed out of the sight of our an∣cestours. But to seeke for this matter farther off, and to omit Caesar, with Diodorus and others, who would have the Britans to be borne of themselves in the very land and meere Aborigines ; that is, Homelings and not forrein brought in: who also imagined, that men in the beginning sprang out of the earth, like unto mushroomes and tod∣stooles: we are taught out of the sacred Historie penned by Moses, that after the Deluge, Sem, Cham, and Japhet, the three sonnes of Noe, having multiplied their issue in great number, departed asunder from the mountaines of Armenia, where the Arke had rested, into divers parts and quarters of the earth, and so, propagated the nations throughout the wide world. That some of their posteritie came to this Isle after the families were by little and little spred and dispersed abroad, both reason it selfe, and also the authoritie of Theophilus Antiochenus, doe joyntly prove. When as, saith hee, in old time, there were few men in Arabia and Chaldaea, after the division of tongues they encreased and multiplied more and more. Heereupon some departed toward the East, some gat them to the spacious and open main-land: others went forward into the North, seeking there to seat themselves: neither gave they over to possesse ground every where, untill they came as farre as to Britaine, scituate in the Northerne Climates. And Moses himselfe expressely sheweth the same, writing, that the Islands of the Gentiles were by the posteritie of Japhet divided in their Regi∣ons. The Islands of Or Nations. Gentiles the Divines call those, which lie farthest off: and Wolfgangus Musculus a Theologer, not of the lowest ranke, thinketh that the na∣tions and families which came from Japhet first inhabited the Isles of Europe, such as (saith he) be England, Origen. lib. 9. cap. 2. Sicilie, &c. Now, that Europe fell unto Japet and his pro∣genie, not Divines onely, but Josephus also and others have recorded. For Isidorus, out of an ancient writer citeth this, The nations descended of Iaphet, possesse from the Mountaine Taurus Northward, the one halfe of Asia, and all Europe so farre as to the Bri∣tish Ocean, leaving names both to places and people both: Of which very many afterward became changed, the rest remaine as they were. And we have seene that blessing of Noe, [ God enlarge Iaphet, Gen. cap. 9. and let him dwell in the Tents of Sem, and let Chanaan be his servant ] fulfilled in the people of Europe. For, Europe, which, as Plinie saith, bred up a people conquerour of all nations, hath triumphed more than once over those other parts of the world which fell unto Sem and Cham: and in this part hath the off-spring of Japhet spred it selfe farre and wide. For of his sonnes, Magog begat the Massagets, Javan the Jones, Thubal the Spaniards, and Mesech the Moschovits. But Gomer his eldest sonne, in these farthest and remotest borders of Europe, gave both beginning and name to the Gomerians, , Cime∣rii, Cumeri, &c. which were after called Cimbrians and Cimerians. For, the name of Cimbrians or Cimerians filled in some sort this part of the world: and not onely in Germanie, but also in Gaul spred exceeding much. They which now are the Gauls, were, as Josephus and Zonaras write, cal∣led of Gomer, Gomari, Gomeraei and Gomeritae. From these Gomarians or Gomerae∣ans of Gaul, I have alwaies thought that our Britaines drew their beginning, and from thence, for a proofe of the said beginning, brought their name: the very pro∣per and peculiar name also of the i. Welch men. Britans, hath perswaded mee thereunto. For even they call themselves ordinarily Kumero, Cymro and Kumeri: like as a or Welch. British wo∣man Kumeraes, and the tongue it selfe, Kumeraeg. Neither acknowledge they any other names: although some there be not of the greatest skill, who from hence have coined in the former age, these words, Cambri and Cambria. Yea, and that Gram∣marian whom Virgil in his Catalects so taunteth and termeth the Britaine Thucy∣dides, Quintilian saith was a Cimbrian. Lib. 8. cap. 3. And whence, trow yee, should wee thinke these names proceed, but from that Gomer, and the Gomerians in Gaul next ad∣joyning? which was the seate of the old Gomerians. That the Germans came of Aschenaz, the Turks from Togorma, sonnes of Gomer, the learned doe verily thinke, because the Jewes even at this day call these, Togormah; like as the former, Aschenas. That the Thracians Iones, Riphaeans and Moschi, &c. are the posteri∣tie of Thirax, Javan, Riphat and Moschus, no man denieth; for that the names sound not unlike: Semblably, that the Ethiopians were the seed of Chus, and the Egyp∣tians of Misraim, because they carry the same names in their owne languages, no man there is but granteth. Why should not we then confesse, that our Britaines or Cumerians, are the very posteritie of Gomer, and of Gomer tooke their denomina∣tion? For, the name accordeth passing well: and granted it is, that they planted themselves in the utmost borders of Europe: Which thing also, the very name of Gomer, imposed first not upon some light occasion, but even by Divine providence and inspiration, Phil. Melanct. doth signifie: For Gomer in the Hebrew tongue, betokeneth utmost Bordering. Neither let any man by way of reproch, object unto our Cumeri or Cimbri, what Sext. Pompeius hath writen, That theeves in the French tongue are called Cimbri. For, albeit the Cimbri (among whom it is likely that our Cumeri were,) living in that couragious and bold age of the world, wherein martiall proësse flou∣rished, wandring (as Possidonius writeth), from these marches of Europe, war∣red by way of robberie, as farre as to the lake Maeotis; yet for all that, the word Cimbri no more signifieth a thiefe, than Aegyptius, one that is superstitious, or Chaldaeus, an Astrologer, and Sybarita, a delicate dainty-mouth. But because those nations were so given, therefore they that are such beare their names. And in this point agreeth right with mee, Ad Sexium Pompeium. Berosus. Censure upon Berosus. that singular ornament of learning Joseph Scaliger. Neither let any man marvell, wherefore I call not Berosus heere to take my part, out of whom writers in these daies furnish themselves with so great meanes. Certes, to speake my mind at once, the edge of that Berosus his authoritie, who commonly goeth under that name, is in my account so Blunt and dull, that I together with the best learned of our age, as namely Volaterran, Vives, Antonius Augustinus, Melchior Canus, and especially Gaspar Varrerius, thinke it to be nothing else, but a ridiculous figment of some craftie foister and jugling deceiver; which Varrerius in his Censure of Berosus Printed at Rome, is soone able to remove out of the Readers minds that errour of theirs so deepely setled, concerning this writer. This is mine opinion and conjecture rather of the Britans originall: For in things of so great Antiquitie, a man may more easily proceede by guesse, than upon grounded reason pronounce sentence either way. And verily this their beginning from Gomer and out of Now France. Gaule seemeth more substantiall, ancient and true, than that from Bru∣tus and Troy. Nay, that this soundeth rather to a truth, and that our Britaines are the very off-spring of the Gaulois, me thinkes I am able to prove, by the name, scite, religion, Now Frenchmen. manners, and language: by all which the most ancient Gaules and Britaines have beene, as it were, in some mutuall societie linked together. And that I may this doe, let me, I pray you, with favourable good leave range abroad for a while at my pleasure. As touching the name, THE NAME. because I have spoken thereof before, thus much onely will I repeate, that as the ancient Gaules are called Gomeraeans, Gomeritae, Gome∣ri, and by contraction Cimbri: so likewise our Britaines be named Cumeri and Kim∣bri. Now that the Gaules were called Gomeri, Josephus and Zonaras (as I said) doe joyntly prove. That they were named also Cimbri, may be gathered out of Cicero and Appian. Those Barbarians whom Marius defeated, Cicero plainely termeth Gauls. De Proconsul. C. Marius, quoth he, repressed the armies of the Gauls, entring in great numbers into Italy. But all Historiographers witnesse, that they were Cimbrians: and the Haber∣geon of their King Beleus, digged up at A x. Aquae Sextiae, where Marius put them to flight, hath shewed the same: For engraven it was with strange letters thus, BELEOS CIMBROS. Forcatulus out of the Annales of France. Likewise, that they who under the conduct of Brennus spoiled Now, Castri or Salona. Delphi in Greece were Gaules, all writers with one voice and mind agree: and yet, that these were named Cimbri, 1235. Appian in his Illyricks doth testifie: The Celts or Gauls, quoth he, whom they call Cimbrians. And heere will I neither cite the testimonie of Lucane, who calleth the hackster, that was hired and sent to kill Marius, a Cimbri∣an, whom Livie and others affirme to have beene a Gaule; nor alleage Plutarch, who nameth the Cimbrians, Gallo-scythians, ne yet Reinerius Reineccius an excel∣lent Historian, who constantly averreth out of Plutarch in his Sertorius, that the Gaules and Cimbrians used the same language. Neither will I urge and streine to my purpose that onely word of the Cimbrians which remaineth among authors, and is produced by Plinie out of Philemon, Morimarusa. to wit, Morimarusa. i. the dead Sea, although it be meere British: For Mor with the That is, Welch. Britans signifieth Sea, and Marw, dead. Seeing therefore, that these people agreed in the most ancient name, from whence passed the said name into this Isle, The Scite. but even with the first Inhabitants, out of Gaule, lying so neere, and by a very small streight of sea severed from it? For the world was not altogether and at once inhabited; but grant wee must, that the countries neerer adjoyning unto the mountaines of Armenia, (where the Arke rested after the flood, and from whence mankind was encreased) were peopled before others; and namely Asia the lesse, and Greece before Italy, Italy before Gaule, and Gaule before Bri∣taine. The consideration whereof is most delectable, Erasmus Mi∣chael of Na∣vigation. in that the highest Creator, had joyned regions, and withall dispersed the Islands so, as their is no such great di∣stance betweene any of them, but that even those which lie farthest off, may from some one neere adjoyning, be seen and plainly as it were discerned by the eie. And for no other purpose was this done; but that the nations when they should over-abound, might discover and describe some places to passe unto and disburthen themselves; so long, untill the universall world were to the glory of the Creator replenished with Inhabitants every where. Wee ought therefore to bee perswaded, that the ancient Gomerians of Gaule (now France) either chased away by the pursuit of others, or cast out for lessening of the multitude, or else inflamed with a desire to travell and see farre countries, (a thing naturally inbred in men) crossed the sea and came over first into this Isle, which from the continent they were able to kenne. And it stands to ve∣rie good reason also, that every countrie received the first Inhabitants from places neere bordering, rather than from such as were most disjoyned. For, who would not thinke, that Cyprus had the first Inhabitors out of Asia next unto it, Or Candie. Crete and Sicilie out of Greece neereby, and Corsica out of Italy a neighbour countrie: and, not to goe farre, Zeland out of Germanie the neerest unto it, as also Island out of Norway, rather than from the remote tracts of Tartarie and Now Bar∣barie. Mauritania? In like manner, why should not wee thinke that out Britaine was inhabited at first by the Gaules their neighbours, rather than either by the Trojans or Italians, the Alab s and Brutians, so farre distant and remoove? Neither doe writers fetch the originall and infancie (as it were) of the Britaines from any other place, than their neighbour country Gaul. The inner parts of Britaine, saith Caesar, is inhabited of them, whom they themselves report out of their records to have beene borne in the Island: the Sea coast, of those, who upon purpose to make warre had passed thither out of Where now are Holland, Zeland, Flan∣ders, Bra∣bant, Gelder∣land & Cleve. Belgium in Gaule, who all in manner carie the names of those cities and States out of which they came thither, and after they had warred, there remained. For there were in Britaine like as also in Gaule, people named Belgae, Atrebatii, Parisi, Cenomanni, &c. Semblably Tacitus, Gene∣rally, quoth he, if a man consider all circumstances, it is most likely that the Gaules beeing neighbours, peopled the land of Britaine next unto them. Yea and Beda, one that a∣mong all our writers favoureth the truth, At the first, saith hee, this Island had those Britaines onely to inhabite it (from whom also it tooke the name) who by report, having sailed out from the tract of Armorica into Britaine, challenged unto themselves the South coasts thereof. Now, he calleth the tract of Armorica, the sea coasts of France. Gaule, oppo∣site unto our Island. This also seemeth to make for our purpose, that Caesar reporteth, How Divitiacus the Gaule even in his remembrance, held a good part both of Gaule and also of Britannie under his government; Britaines in Gaule. as also, (that which is of greatest mo∣ment) Plinie among the maritime people, just over against Britaine, neere unto the County of Bullen, reckoned the Britannos, yet in some Copies of Plinie, wee reade Bri∣annos. Britaines: like as Dionysius after a more ancient writer than he, in these verses, . , , . Word for word thus: And verily, that utmost point and angle of this Of Europe. part, Inhabite the Iberians, people of haughtie heart: Neere Gebraltar, at Hercules his pillars cal'd of old, Turning up the maine in length, what way the current cold Of Northern Ocean with strong tides doth interflow and swell, Where Britaines, and those faire white folke, the martiall Germans dwell. For these words [ where Britaines ] seeme to have respect unto those other, [ Turning upon the maine in length ] and Eustathius, who did set forth his Commentaries upon this author, understandeth it of the Britons in Gaule, in these words, , that is, And of these Britons, the Isles of Britaine over against them tooke their denomination. Howbeit, Avienus and Stephen in his booke of Cities, Religion. are of a contrarie mind. Moreover the same Religion was of both people observed; Among the Britaines, saith Tacitus, there is to bee seene in their ceremonies and superstitious perswasions an apparant conformitie with the Gaules. The Gaules, quoth Solinus, after a detestable manner of sacred rites, not to the honor but rather to the injurie of religion, offred mans flesh in their sacrifices. That the Britaines did the very same, Dio Cassius beside others reporteth in his Nero. Both Nations also had their Druidae, as Caesar and Tacitus very sufficient writers doe witnesse. Concerning which Druidae, let not the Reader thinke much to run over this whole passage out of Caesar. Druidae. The Druidae are present at all Divine service. The overseers they be of publike and private sacrifices, the interpretours also of their religious rites and cere∣monies. To these a great number of younge men doe flocke for to bee taught, and those doe they highly esteeme and honour. For lightly they decide and determine all controversies, as well publike as private: And in case any hainous fact bee committed, if there bee a murther or man-slaughter, if variance arise about inheritance, if strife about the bounds of lands, they in their discretion judge of the matter; they appoint rewards, they award penalties, and punishments, If any either private person, or body politike stand not to their Decree, they put them by all sacrifices, as excommunicate. And this among them is the most grievous punishment. They that be thus interdicted, are reckoned as godlesse and most wicked persons: All men decline from them, they avoid both meeting and talking with them for feare of taking harme by contagion from them. Neither have they the benefits of Law though they request it, nor be capable of any office, though they sue for it. Moreover, of all these Druides there is one President, who hath the greatest authoritie among them. When he is dead, looke who excelleth the rest in worth and dignitie, he succeedeth him: But if there be many of equall estimation, chosen there is one by the voices of the Druides. Sometimes also they fall together by the eares, and take armes about this place of precedencie. These Dru∣ides at one certaine time of the yeare hold a solemne Session within a consecrated place, in the marches of the About Chartres. Carnutes, a countrey held to be the middle of all France. Hither resort as unto the terme from all parts, as many as have any controversies or suits in law: and to their judgements and decrees they yield obedience. Their learning and profession is thought to have beene first found and devised in Britaine, and so from thence translated into France: and now also in these daies they that desire more exact knowledge thereof, The Doctrine of the Druida found in Bri∣taine. goe thither for the most part, to be instructed therein. The Druides are wont to bee freed from warfare: neither with the rest pay they tribute. Immunitie they have in exemption, as from war-service, so from all other charges whatsoever. Thus, many there bee who being excited with so great rewards, and of their owne accord meete together at Schoole for to learne, and are thither sent by their kinsfolke, friends and parents. There by report, they learne by rote a great num∣ber of verses. And so they continue still schollars for certaine yeares together; neither doe they thinke it lawfull to commit what they learne to writing; whereas otherwise in every thing almost, in publike also and private dealings, they use Greeke letters. This order they have ta∣ken, I suppose, for two reasons: because they would not have their doctrine divulged, nor their scholars by trusting to their written bookes, to neglect their owne memorie a thing inci∣dent lightly to most schollars; who presuming upon the helpe of writings, uselesse diligence in learning without booke, and as little in exercising their memorie. This one point principally they are desirous to perswade their scholars, That our soules are immortall, and after death passe out of one man into another; and by this meanes they suppose men, setting behind them all feare of death, are most of all stirred up unto vertue. Furthermore, concerning the starres and their motion, touching the greatnesse of heaven and earth, of the Nature of things, of the power and might of the immortall Gods, much dispute they make, and as many precepts they give to youth. Whereupon Lucan in this wise speaketh unto them: Et vos barbaricos ritus, morém{que} sinistrum Sacrorum, Druidae, positis repetistîs ab armis. Solis nosse Deos & Caeli sydera vobis Aut solis nescire datum. Nemora alta remotis Incolitis lucis. Vobis autoribus, umbras Non tacitas Erebi sedes, Ditis{que} profundi Pallida regna petunt, regit idem spiritus artus Orbe alio: longae, canitis si cognita, vitae Mors media est. Certè, populi quos despicit Arctos, Foelices errore suo, quos, ille timorum Maximus, haud urget laethi metus: inde ruendi Inferrum mens prona viris, animae{que} capaces Mortis: & ignavum est rediturae parcere vitae. Yee Priests also hight Druidae, your sacrifices leaw'd And barb'rous rites, which were forlet in wars surceasse, renew'd. Yee onely know, or yee alone know not the gods above And heavenly wights. Among high trees in groves remote, yee love To dwell, and teach that soules of men their bodies parted fro, Passe not to silent Erebus where Pluto reign's below, Among the pale and grisly ghosts: but spirit still the same Rul's limbs and joynts in other world: And death (if that yee frame Your precepts grounded sure on truth and knowledge) is no more, Than middle point twixt future life and that which went before. Certes those Northerne people are right happie; whom we see Perswaded of such vaine conceits, wherein they nuzzeled be. No feare of death which men most dread, can once their stomacks dant, This maketh them so resolute, so bold and valiant: Vpon the pike and sword they runne, they passe not to be slaine; T'is cowardise to spare that life, which will returne againe. By what name soever these were knowne to their Celts or Britaines, An Oke also in the British or Welch tongue is called Derw. it may seeme that this name of Druides came from a Greeke primitive head, to wit, , that is, an Oke, for that they held nothing more sacred than the Misselto of the Oke; whereupon Ovid writeth thus: Adviscum Druidae, Druidae, cantare solebant. To Misselto goe Druidae, goe Druidae, they did sing. as who commonly dwelt within Oke-groves, and celebrated no sacrifice and divine service without the branches and leaves thereof. Lib. 16. cap. 4. But this, will Plinie more amply de∣clare in these words of his: The Druidae (for so they call their Diviners, Wisemen and estate of Clergie) esteeme nothing in the world more sacred then Misselto, and the tree whereupon it groweth, so it bee an Oke. Now this you must take by the way; These Priests or Clergie men chuse of purpose such groves for their divine service, as stood onely upon Okes: Nay they solemnize no sacrifice, nor celebrate any sacred ceremonies without bran∣ches and leaves thereof: so as they may seeme well enough to bee thereupon named Dryidae in Greeke. And in very deed, whatsoever they find growing to that tree, beside the owne fruit, they esteeme it as a gift sent from heaven, and a sure signe, that the God himselfe whom they serve, hath chosen that peculiar tree. And no marvell; for Misselto is passing geason, and hard to be found upon the Oke: But when they meet with it, they gather it very devoutly, and with many ceremonies. First, they principally observe that the Moone bee just six daies old: for upon that day begin they their moneths and new yeares, yea and their severall ages, which have their revolutions every thirtie yeares, because shee is thought then to bee of great power and force sufficient, and is not come to her halfe light or end of her first quarter. It they call in their Language, All-heale, [for they have an opinion, that it healeth all maladies whatsoever.] Now when they are about to gather it, after they have duely prepared their sacrifices and festivall cheere under the said tree, they bring thither two young bullocks milke-white, whose hornes are then and not before bound up. This done, the Priest arraied in a surplise or white vesture, climeth the tree, and with a golden bill cutteth off [the Misselto] and they beneath receive the same in a white souldiers cassock. Then fall they to kill the beasts aforesaid for sacrifice, mumbling many oraisons and praying, That it would please God to blesse this gift of his, to their good unto whom hee had vouchsa∣fed to give it. Now this conceite they have of Misselto thus gathered, that what living creature soever, otherwise barren, drinketh thereof, it will presently thereupon become fruit∣full; also that it is a soveraigne counterpoison and remedie against all venom. So superstiti∣ous are people oftentimes in such frivolous and foolish toies as these. Heereto accordeth well that Diodorus Siculus in the same sense hath termed these Priests of the Gaules , Saronidae. which word, (as they all know, who have skill in the Greeke tongue, betokeneth Okes. And Maximus Tyrius writeth thus of the Celts, i. the Gaules; That they wor∣ship Iupiter, whose symbole or signe, it the highest Oke. Furthermore, it may seeme to proceede from these Druides, that our Saxons (as we reade in Alfricus) called a Di∣viner or wise man in their language, Dry. Dry. Of these if you bee willing to learne more, I referre you to Mela, Lactantius, Eusebius De Praeparatione Evangelica, and the Co∣medie Aulularia of Pseudo-Plautus. Bar The Frenchmen or Gaules, had likewise among their religious persons, the Bardi, who to the tune of the Harpe sung Dities in verse, conteining the famous exploits of brave and noble men. From whence it is that the same Lucan before cited speaketh thus unto them. Vos quo{que} qui fortes animas, belló{que} peremptas, Laudibus in longum, vates, dimittitis avum, Plurima securi fudistis carmina, Bardi. And yee the Poets, Bardi call'd, who knights redoubted prise Praise-worthie most, that died in the field, and them doe eternise; Pour'd foorth now many a verse in song, and that in carelesse wise. And even those also doe our Welchmen. Britans still at this day terme by the very same name: For them they call Bard, who besides the exercise of that function, doe especially ad∣dict themselves to the skill of Heraldry, and the drawing of Pedigrees. But whether the Britaines in like manner as the Gaules, believed, That they were descended from Pluto, we have no record to lead us. Whereas the Gauls did for that That is, their descent from Pluto. cause, deter∣mine and end all their spaces of times, by reckoning nights and not daies, so as the day might in order follow the night, the very same have our Britans observed. For, that which the Latines call Septimana, and two Septimanae, they terme with-nos, that is, eight nights, and Pimthec-nos, that is, fifteene nights. Likewise both peoples seeme to have framed unto themselves, Their Repub∣lique or com∣mon wealth. one and the same forme of Common weale and government. For, ruled they were not by one mans scepter: but right as Gaul, so Britaine also had many Kings. And even as the Gauls in cases of greater waight and danger called an assembly of the whole nation and e∣lected one chiefe governour: so did the Britaines also, as it may bee gathered out of these words of Caesar, The severaignty of command, and managing the warre, was by a common Counsell granted to Cassibelinus. Cassivelaunus. Neither were these two Nations unlike in manners, customes and ordinances. For to let this passe, Their Man∣ners. that both of them were most warlike, and exceedingly given to slaughter: certaine it is, that in joyning of battels, and adventuring of dangers, they were one as forward as the other: as may appeare by Strabo, Tacitus, Dio, Herodi∣an and others. For manners and conditions, saith Strabo, the Britans are in part like to the Gauls: and anon he addeth, In fight for the most part they be fierce and cruell like unto certaine Gauls. And Tacitus according with him, The Britans, saith he, that were not vanquished by the Romans, remaine such as the ancient Gauls were. And in another place, Next neighbours to the Gauls and like unto them be the Britaines. That the Britaines fought, armed after the Gaulish fashion, Mela doth report. The Britaines in their wars use a number of Chariots as Strabo writeth, like as some of the Gauls. The manner was of the one people and the other, in time of warre to range their battels apart by severall nations, that the distinct valour of them both might more evidently appeare. That the Gauls practised this, Caesar witnesseth in these words: The Gauls being divided by their sundry cities and states kept the fourds and passages. Which also Tacitus affirmeth of the Britaines in the battell of Carattacus, The nati∣ons stood by troups and companies before the fortifications. The Gauls, saith Strabo, were of a docible wit, and apt to learne: as also the Britaines, whose wits Agricola in Tacitus preferred before the studēts of Gaul, as being now curious to attaine the eloquence of the Roman language, whereas they lately rejected the language. The Gauls, Strabo reporteth to have been of an ingenuous nature and single hear∣ted: which Tacitus seemeth to note and observe in the Britans, writing that they are ready and willing to endure levies of men and mony, and all other burdens imposed by the Empire, if wrongfull insolences herein be forborne. Caesar reporteth, that the Gauls upon an unconstant and variable mind that they carried, loved evermore change and alteration in the government: The Britains like∣wise, saith Tacitus, were variable, given to factions and siding. By meanes of this in∣constancie of the Gauls, which Caesar more mildly calleth an Infirmitie, so great cre∣dulitie crept into their minds, that the credulity of the Gauls grew to be a proverbe, and one Poet hath written thus thereof: Et tumidus Gallâ credulitate fruar: And full of this conceit will I Make use of Gauls Credulitie. Neither have our Britans as yet therein degenerated from them, who most readily give eare even to Old wives tales. Milesian fables, and either through superstitious hope or like feare doe presently believe most foolish prophesies. We read in Strabo, that the Gauls grieved exceedingly and tooke to heart the a∣buse which they saw done unto their kinred. That there is the same Sympathie and fellow feeling in our Britans above all other nations, it is better knowne than can be uttered, and rife in every mans mouth. The Gauls, as Caesar recordeth, according as every one excelled others in noble birth and wealthy estate, so kept they about them a greater traine of servants and dependants, whom they called Ambacti: Ambacti. which was the onely grace, countenance, and port they carried. Neither know our British Noblemen or gentry of Wales at this day, any other shew of reputation: From whom, as it is thought, the English have learned to leade after them so great a retinue of followers and serving men: in which thing they have not long since out-gone all other in Europe. That the British buildings were in every respect sutable with those in Gaul, and compassed round about with woods, Caesar and Strabo doe shew unto us. The Gauls, as witnesseth Strabo, ware chaines of gold, about their necks: and Bunduica the British Lady, saith Xiphilinus, had likewise a golden chaine, and was clad in a garment of sundry colours. And where at this day is that ornament more in use than in this Isle and among our Britans? That Britans and Gauls both, adorned their middle finger with a ring Pliny doth report. The same Strabo maketh mention of the Gauls, that they nourished the bush of their heads; and Caesar testifieth that the Britans went with long haire. It appeareth in many authors, that the Gauls used certaine garments which in their mother tongue they termed Brachae ; Brachae. that these were also common to our Britaines, this verse of Martiall doth prove; Quàm veteres Brachae Britonis pauperis: Than Brachae old of Briton poore. I passe over that which Silius Italicus writeth of the Gauls: Quinetiam ingenio fluxi, sed primà feroces, Vaniloquum Celtae genus, ac mutabile mentis. The Gauls though fierce at first, soone yield and hold not out, by kind; A nation given to vanitie of words and change of mind. Because these qualities are common to most nations, I might adde hereto other par∣ticulars, wherein these people have jumped just together: but I feare me lest mali∣tious evill-willers would wrest them to the detraction and slander of the said nations. Besides, that saying pleaseth me exceeding well, All in a meane and within measure: and the argument perhaps which is drawne from common manners, may seeme not of the greatest validitie. Language. Now are we come to the language, in which lieth the maine strength of this dis∣putation and the surest proofe of peoples originall. For no man, I hope, will deny, that they which joyne in communitie of language, concurred also in one and the same ori∣ginall. And if all the histories that ever were had miscarried and perished; if no wri∣ter had recorded, that we Englishmen are descended from Germans, the true and naturall Scots from the Irish, the Britons of Armorica in France from our Britans; the societie of their tongues would easily confirme the same: yea and much more ea∣sily, than the authoritie of most sufficient Historiographers. If therefore I shall prove, that the ancient Gauls and our Britans used one and the selfe same language, then the very truth will of force drive us to confesse, that they had also the same begin∣ning. Neither passe I what Caesar hath written, that the Gauls were of divers lan∣guages: since that Strabo saith, They differed only in dialect. They did not all, quoth hee, every where use the same tongue, but somewhat, little though it were, it varied. But that the language of the old Gauls was all one with the British (unlesse haply in va∣rietie of dialect), Caesar himselfe doth shew, writing that the maner was of the French or Gauls who desired further knowledge in the discipline and learning of the Drui∣des, to goe over into Britaine unto our Druidae. Now seeing that they had no use of bookes, it stands to good reason, that in teaching they spake the same tongue that the Gauls did. Which Cornelius Tacitus more plainely affirmeth; the British speech, saith he, and the French or Gaulish differ not much. Whence it is that Beatus Rhena∣nus, Gesner, Hottoman, Peter Daniel, Picardus, and all others that have subscribed and done honour to venerable antiquitie, are all become of this opinion: except some fewe who will have the Gauls to have spoken the German language. I have made use in these words of William Sa∣lisburies Glossarie, and another old Manuscript. But least any man herein should cast dust in our eies, let us out of authors gather and conferre as many words as we can out of the old Gauls, as it were ship-planks caught up from a shipwracke (seeing that the said tongue is now even drowned under the waves of ob∣livion.) For very many words we shall see not hardly nor violently strained, but pas∣sing easily, and in manner without any wresting, to agree with our British, both in sound and sense. Ausonius in this verse of his, Divona. writing of a fountaine at Burdeaux, Divona Seltarum lingua fons addite Divis: Thou fountaine added to the Gods in Gaulish Divona hight. witnesseth, that Divona in the French language signifieth, Gods fountaine. Now doe our Britaines call God, That is▪ Welchmen. Dyw, and a Fountaine, Vonan: of which is compounded Di∣vonan, and by the Latine Analogie, and for the verse sake, Divona. That Jupiter, Tarani . whom the Greekes, of Thunder call , and the Latines Tonans, that is, Thunderer was worshiped of the Gaules under the name of Taranis, there bee writers, not a few that have reported. But Taran with the Britaines betokeneth Thunder. In which signification the Germans seeme to have named Jupiter, Thon∣der: For Jupiters day or Thursday, they call Thonderdach, which is as much, as The Thunderers day. The Gauls had another God, Hesus. by Lucane named Hesus, and by Lactantius Heus, whom also the Author of Queroli termed Annubis latrans, that is, Barking Annubis ; for that, painted he was in the forme of a Dog: and Huad with our welch Britaines betokeneth a Dog. Most certaine it is that the Gauls worshipped Mercurie under the name of Teu∣tates, Teutates. as the Inventors of Arts, and guide of their journeys: And Diw Taith in the British or Welch tongue, is as much as the God of Travelling: And that Plato in his Phaedrus and Philebus calleth Mercurie Theut, I am not ignorant. Howbeit I know there be some, who will have Teutates to be the same that the Germans called Tuisco in Tacitus, Tewsday Tuisday. and is all one with Mars ; as also that we the of-spring of Germans name thereupon Mars day, Tuisday. Concerning these three Gods of the Gauls, take with you, Lib. 1. if you please, these three verses of Lucane, Et quibus immitis placatur sanguine diro Teutates, horrens{que} feris altaribus Hesus, Et Taranis Scythicae non mitior ara Dianae. And they that use with cursed bloud their Idol-gods to please, Teutates fell, and Hesus grim, whom nought else may appease But sacrifice of humane flesh: and Taranis likewise, Worship'd as curst Diana is, just after Scythicke guise. That the foule Spirits named Incubi, Dusii. were of the Gauls termed Dusii, because they practise that filthy uncleannesse of theirs continually, Saint Augustine and Isidorus both doe testifie: But that which is continuall and daily, the Britains still doe expresse by the word Duth. Pomponius Mela writeth, That the religious women attending upon a certaine God, whom the Gauls worshipped, counted holy votaries of perpetuall virginitie, were called of the Gauls, Len Senae, or Lenae rather I would read if I durst. For, such con∣secrated Virgins, whom now folke name Nuns, the Britans, as it is an old Glossarie, termed Leanes: whence a most ancient Nunnery, Lean-minister, now called Lemster, drew the name. The Gaules, saith Polybius, in their owne tongue called their mercenarie souldiers Gaessatae: Gaessatae. and at this day the Welsh-Britains doe call their hired servants Guessin. Gessi. Valiant men were, as Servius saith, named of the Gaules Gessi: and Guassdewr a∣mong the Britains importeth the same that in Latin, Vir fortis & strenuus, that is, a valorous and hardie man. Gessum. Hitherto may bee referred Gessum, which was a weapon proper to the Gaules, as Pilum to the Romans, and Framea to the Germans. But of this, anon. Caterva. As Phalanx was properly the Macedonians Legion, so was Caterva peculiar to the Gauls, as we may see in Vegetius. Neither is this word grown out of use with the Bri∣tains, who use to call a troupe Caturfa, and war Kad, and the strength of war which li∣eth in a Legion Kaderne, yea and Caterna, as is found in some Copies of Vegetius. Cateia. To this Kad, may well be reduced Cateia, which was a kind of warlike weapon a∣mong the Gauls, as Isidorus reporteth. Gessa. Gessa, a Gaulish weapon, Servius doth interpret to be a mans speare, whereunto the British Cethilou seemeth to come neere, which Ninnius expoundeth to be as much as Stakes burnt at the end, and a warlike seede or generation. The Gauls whom Brennus marched with into Greece, named in their owne lan∣guage that order of Horse-fight which consisteth of three horses [in a ranke] as saith Pausanias, Trimarcia. Trimarcia: For a horse they called Marca: which in that very signification is meere and British. For Tri signifieth three, and March an horse. Pausanias in the same booke recordeth, that the Gauls termed their owne country∣shields Thireos: Thireos. which even to this day the Britans name Tarian. Caesar hath in his Journals or Day-bookes writen, as Servius saith, That he in Gaule being caught up of the enemy, and armed as he was carried upon his horse backe, one of his enemies that knew him chanced to meete him, and insulting over him said, Ce∣dos Caesar: Cetos. which in the Gauls tongue is as much as Let goe Caesar: now, among the Britans Geduch betokeneth as much. Rheda. Rheda, a Gaulish word, is of the same signification, saith Quintilian, that Caruta, that is, a chariot, or waggon, among the Latins. This word the British tongue doth not now acknowledge: howbeit, that it hath been in use among the Britans, Rhediad for a course, Rhediad. Rheder to run, and Rhedecfa a race, doe plainly shew: which words that they spring from the same stocke, no man need to make doubt. And what absurditie were it from hence to derive Eporedia, a City of the Salassians, which Pliny writeth, tooke that name of Horse-breakers. Eporedia. Another kind of waggon a charriot there was, used of both these people, which by one name they called Covinus, Covinus. and the driver Covinarius. And albeit this word toge∣ther with that kind of waggon it selfe be quite growne out of use, yet the primitive thereof, as I may so say, remaineth still among the Britains: in whose language the word Cowain signifieth to carry or ride in a waggon. Essedum. Essendum likewise was a Gaulish waggon or charriot rather, meet for the warres: which together with Caesar, Propertius attributes to the Britans in this verse, Essedacaelatis siste Britanna jugis. Stay there your British charriots with yokes so faire engrav'n. Circius. Circius is a wind by name passing well knowne, unto which Augustus Caesar both vowed and also built a temple in Gallia. That the word is Gaulish, Phavori us a Gau∣lois borne declareth in Agellius. Our Gauls, saith he, call the wind blowing out of their land, and which they find to be most fell and boisterous, by the name of Circius, of the whir∣ling and whistling, I suppose, that it makes. Of all winds this is known to be most bluste∣ring and violent: now, Cyrch, with the Britans betokeneth force and violence, as may be seene in their Letany. Penninum. The Pennine Alpes, which Caesar calleth the highest Alpes, had this name impo∣sed upon them, as Livie writeth, not of Annibal Poenus, that is the Carthaginian, but of that Hill which with the highest top among the Alpes the Mountainers of Gaule consecrated and named Penninus. But Pen with the Britans even in these daies signi∣fieth the tops of hils: whence the highest mountaines that we have, to wit, Pen-mon∣maur, Pendle, Pen Pencoh-cloud, and Pennigent gat their names. Neither have the high mountaines Apennini in Italy their name from ought els. Apenninus. The cities and States of Gaule coasting upon the Ocean, were called, as Caesar writeth, Armorica. after the custome of the Gauls, Aremoricae: with whom the Britans accord in the same name for the same thing. For, with them Ar-more, is as much as by the sea, or upon the sea: And in the very same sense Strabo nameth them in Greek In the raigne of Dioclesian the Emperor, Bauchadae. the rurall people in Gaule made a com∣motion. And to the crue of that faction of theirs they gave the name Baucadae. And among the Britans, Swineheards and country gnoffs, be called Beichiad. The inborne theeves of the land, Vargae. Lib. 4. Epist. 6. the Gauls, saith Sidonius, named Vargae: And I have found in the Glossarie of the Cathedrall Church of Lhandaff, that theeves in the British tongue were in old time knowne by the name of Veriad. The Allobrogae, Allobroges. saith that ancient and excellent Scholiast upon Iuvenal, were so named, because Brogae in French signifieth a land or Territorie, and Alla, another: As one would say, Translated out of another place. But Bro in British, is a region or country, and Allan, without, or externall: so that the Etymologie in both tongues, holdeth very well. There is an herbe like to Plantain called in Gaule Glastrum, saith Plinie, wherewith the Britans died and coloured themselves, Glastum. Woad. as writers testifie. This is the herbe which we terme Woad, and it giveth a blew colour: which colour at this day, the Britans terme Glasse. Isatis. Vi rum, an herbe. Lutteum in Caesar. Pomponius Mela corre∣cted. This was the Greeks Isatis, by the testimony of Plinie, and the Diars, vitrum, by the authority of Oribasius. Whereby, Pomponius Mela may easily be corrected, if in stead of Ultro, you put Vitro: where he saith thus, Britanni incertum ob decorem, an ob quid aliud, ultro corpora infecti, that is, whether the Britans died their bodies with woad for a beautifull shew, or in some other respect, it is uncertaine. The Gallathians who spake the same language, as S. Hierome witnesseth, that the ancient Gauls did, Co cus. had a little shrub called Coccus ; of which that deep red skarlet co∣lour was made: and this very colour the Britans usually name Coco. That Brachae were garments common to French and Britains wee have shewed be∣fore. Brachae. Diodorus Siculus calleth such, unshorne, or undressed and of sundry colours. And even now adaies the Britans terme foule and ragged clothes, Brati. If Laina was an old Gaulish word, Lainae. as Strabo seemeth to tell us, when he writeth thus, The Gauls weave them cassocks of thickned wooll which they call Lainas ; the Bri∣tans are not gone far from them, who in their tongue name wooll Glawn. Bardus in the Gauls tongue signifieth a Singer, Bardus. Festus Pompeius is mine author: and this is a meere British word. Bardocucullus, Bardocucullu . as we are taught out of Martial and others, was the cloake that the Gaulish Bardi woore. And like as Bard, so the other part also of the foresaid word, re∣maineth whole among the Britans, who call such a cloake, Cucull. Gaul, Brance. saith Plinie, yeelded a kinde of Corne of their owne, which they called Brance, and we Sandalum, a graine of the finest and neatest sort. Among the Britans likewise, meale of the whitest graine is named Guineth Urane. The herbe which the Greekes, of five leaves doe call Pentaphyllon, was named of the Gaules Pempedula, Pempedula. as sheweth Apuleius. Now, Pymp in British, is five, and Deilen, a leafe. As the Gaules by Pymp meant the number of five, so by Petor, foure, as wee learne out of Festus : Petoritum. who sheweth, that Petoritum was a chariot or wagon of the Gaules, so called of foure wheeles: and this word Pedwar in the British tongue signifieth foure. Among wooden instruments, Guvia. Canterium, in English a Leaver, was among the Gaules called Guvia, as Isidorus writeth: and novv the same in the British language, is named Gwif. Betulla, Betulla. vvhich vve call Byrch, Plinie nameth a Gaulish tree. Hee vvould if he lived novv call it the British tree. For it groweth most plentifully in Britaine, and in the British tongue is named Bedw. Wine delayed with water, as we read in Athens, the Gaules called Dercoma: and among the Britans, Dercoma. Dwr, betokeneth water. And even so, (not to prosecute all that may be said:) in Dioscorides, the herbe Ferne, Rati . called in Latin Filix, and of the old Gauls, Ratis, is in the British tongue termed Redin. Scovies. The Elder tree, in Latine Sambucus, in the old Gaulish Scovies, is in British, Iscaw. Vetonica. The herbe in Italy, Seratula, in old Gaulish, Vetonica, the Britans and wee doe call Betany. That which in Plinie the Latines name Terrae adeps, that is, the fat of the ground, Marga. the Gaules Marga, is of the Britans called Marle. The white or bright marle, named of the Latines Candida Marga, Gliscomarga. of the Gaules Gliscomarga, might of the Bri∣tans be termed Gluismarl: For Gluys, with them is as much as Bright or shining. A three-footed stoole, which the Latines name Sellula Tripes: the Gauls, as wee read in Sulpitius Severus, Tripetia. Tripetia, is among the Britans termed Tribet. That which the La∣tines meane by Centum pedes, Candetum. that is, a hundred foot, the Gaules in Columella under∣stand by Candetum, and the Britans by Cantroed. A Birds bill, in Latine Avis rostrum : the Gaules, Becco. as we read in Suetonius, called Becco, and the Britans name Pic. Galba. Neither should I bee as fancy-full as Goropius, if I reduced Suetonius his Galba, which signifieth exceeding fat, Bulga. to the British word Galuus, that betokeneth, passing big: or Bulga in Valerius Flaccus for a leather Budget, Soldurij. unto the British Butsiet: or the Soldurij in Caesar, put for men Vowing to die and live one with ano∣ther. Planarat. Taxea. Sithum. Cervisia. Ale, a drinke. Devoted, unto the Britans Sowdiws: or Plinie his Planarat, for a plough, unto Arat, which in the British tongue signifieth a plough: or Isidorus his Taxea for Lard, unto the Britans Tew, or Diodorus Siculus his drinke called Zithum, unto their Sider, or Cervisia, unto Keirch, that is, Otes, whereof the Britans in many places make that drinke (or rather to Cwrwf ) which we in English terme Ale. That all these were the ancient words of the ancient Gaules, appeareth evidently out of those Authors; and you see how fitly they for the most part agree and accord as it were in consent with our British words, in sound and sense both. The Termi∣nations or Ends of pla∣ces Names. Hereunto thus much moreover may be added, that seeing the ancient names of places end with both people in the same termination, to wit, in Dunum, Briva, Ritum; Durum, Magus, &c. it may be gathered that these were not divers nations. And even from hence verily a sound reason may be drawn, that we Englishmen are sprung from the Germanes, for that the later and more moderne names of our townes end in Bur∣row, Berry, Ham, Steed, Ford, Thorp, and Wich, which carrie a just and equall correspon∣dence unto the terminations of the Dutch townes; Burg, Berg, Heim, Stadt, Furdt, Dorp, and Wic. Againe, the reason of certaine old Gaulish words may bee so fitly given out of our British tongue, the property and nature of the thing agreeing also thereunto, that of necessity we must confesse, either they were names imposed by the Britans, or els the Britans s ake French. But let it suffice to alledge one or two for all. The third part of Gaul, saith Caesar, they inhabite, who in their owne language be na∣med Celtae, . and in ours Galli, but of the Greeks Callathae. But whence they were called Celtae and Gallathae the best learned of all the French, could never as yet tell: But let them consider and see, whether it come not of the British word Gualt, which even yet among the Britans betokeneth the haire or bush of the head, as also Gualtoc, that signifi∣eth Comata, Lipsius, de Pro∣nunti tione. pag. 96. that is, with long haire: whereof it may seeme that Celtica, Gallathae, and Galli, are termes mollified by variety of pronuntiation. Now that the Celtae were called Comati, of their long haire which studiously they cherished, all learned men doe joynt∣ly grant: and as for the letters, C. and K. Q. and G. how should one (considering their force and native sound) put a difference betweene them? That the famous and noble river Garumna. Carunne in France carrieth a swelling streame, and as if the waves were angry and chased, whereupon Poets name it with these attri∣butes, Validus, Aequoreus, and Rapidus Garumna, that is, the strong, sealike, and swift Garumna, it is so well knowne as nothing more: And all that doth Garw in the British tongue import. The river Arar. Arar passeth marvellous gently, so as by the eie uneth it can be discer∣ned which way the streame goeth, whereupon the Poets give these Epithets unto it, Araris tardior, and Lentus Arar, that is, Slow and Still Arar. But Ara with the Bri∣tans betokeneth Still and Slow. Rhodanus, Rhodanus. Rhos e. into which Arar doth fall, runneth downe amaine with an exceeding swift, and violent current: and therefore it is termed, Incitus, Celer, and Praeceps, that is, swift, quicke, running headlong: Which name, Rhodanus, disagreeth not much from the British Rhedec, that signifieth a speedinesse in running. That the Hils Montagnes de avergne or Cevennae. Gebennae runne out farre into Gaul, Gebennae. in manner of a long continued ridge, Strabo and others doe make mention. And that Keve among our Britaines soundeth as much as the backe or ridge of an Hill, appeareth by the British Dictiona∣rie: and I my selfe have seene a long chaine of hils in Yorke-shire, which the Inhabi∣tants there doe call the Kivin. Considering that stones were in old time errected in Gaul by the high waies side, at the distance just of every Mile and halfe. thousand and five hundred paces: see it also that the Gaul-like Leuca, or League, containeth, as Jornandes writeth, just so many paces; and Leach in the British tongue betokeneth a Stone, Leuca. I would have the learned French-men say, whether the said Leuca tooke not that name thereof. About the Sea side of that part of France, which was called Narbonensis, where (as the fabulous report go∣eth) Hercules and Albion fought together, there lie so many stones every where all abroad, that a man would verily thinke it had rained stones there: whereupon wri∣ters name it, Stony Strond, or stonie field. the Stonie Strond, and stonie field: The French in these daies call it Le Craux. And yet they know not the reason of this name. But Stones in the British tongue, be termed Craig. They that heretofore inhabited the maritime tract of Gaul, which is next unto us, Morini. were in their owne language called Morini: and seeing that the Sea is named Mor in British, it seemeth that thereupon they were so termed. For the Britans call such as dwell upon the Sea coast Morinwyr: like as Aremorica betokeneth long since in Gau∣lish, and now in British, By the Sea side. Thus Arelate a most famous citie of Gaul, Arles. Ar late. seated in a moist and waterie soile, may seeme to have taken that name of the very scite thereof: For Ar in British signi∣fieth Vpon, and Laith, Moisture, Vxellodunum, Cadena in Quercy or Yool∣dun. saith Caesar, was a towne having on every side a steepe accesse unto it, and scituate upon an high Hill. But Vchell among the Britaines is as much as steepe or loftie, Vxellodunum. Dunum. and Dunum with the ancient Gaules, betokeneth a high place or hill: as Plutarch hath taught us out of Clitiphon, in his booke of Rivers: and the same was also in use among the old Britaines. The Promontorie That is, an Harpe. Citharistes, Cytharistes. Plinie placeth in Gaul neere unto Marsiles, where now is seene the towne Tolon: but if you aske our Welsh Britains, what is Cythara, in their language, they will tell you by and by Telen. Againe, that no doubt may herein bee left behind, seeing it is evident that the late French tongue is come from the Latine and Germane, yet so as therein neverthe∣lesse there remaine very many words still of the old Language: I have heard of those that be skilfull in both tongues, that very many of those French words, which cannot be reduced, either to the Latine or German Originall (and therefore may be thought of the old Gallique) doe come as neere unto the British as is possible. As for example, the French men at this day use Guerir, and the Britans Guerif for To heale. The French say Guaine, the Britans Gwain, for a sheath: The French, Derechef, the Britaines Der∣chefu, for againe: The French Camur, the Britaines Cam, for crooked: the French Ba∣taeu, the Britaines Bad, for a Boad: the French Gourmand, for an over-great-eater, the Britans Gormod, for Overmuch: the French Baston, the Britans Pastwn, for a staffe or cudgill: the French Accabler, the Britans Cablu, for to oppresse: the French Haure, the Britans Aber, for an Haven: and Comb is still used of both the nations for a Valley. There are of this sort very many more, which haply the Reader may distaste, al∣though they serve especially for this purpose now in hand. But whereas Tacitus writeth, that the people of the Aestii, used the fashions and habit of the Suevians, but in language came neerer to the Britans, that maketh nothing against my Assertion. For the Languages most remote, in some points agree. And of late A ∣gerius Busbequius, Epist. 4. Embabssadour from the Emperour to the great Turke, hath ob∣served many Dutch and English words in the Biland Ta rica Chersonessus. Little Tar∣taria or Pero∣copsca. Hereupon it may be concluded, that the ancient Gauls Inhabitants of the country now named France, and Britaines of this Isle spake one and the same language: and by necessary consequence the originall of the Britaines is to bee reduced unto the Gauls. For we must confesse, as I said before, that France or Gaul was peopled before Britain, as lying neerer unto Armenia: and as it was plentifull in corne, so, by the te∣stimony of Strabo, more fruitfull of men: Seeing also, that the Gauls sent out and planted their colonies all abroad, in Italy, Spaine, Germanie, Thracia and A ia: much more then by all reason and congruitie in Britan so neere, and no lesse plenteous than the rest. Neither can it chuse but make for the Britaines reputation even in the highest degree, to have derived their beginning from the ancient Gauls, who in martiall prowesse have surpassed all others: with whom the Romans for many years maintained war, not about superioritie in glory, but for the very main chance of life and living: and who (to use the Poets words rather than mine owne) Per omnem Invecti Europam, quasi grando Aquilone vel Austro Importata, gravi passim sonnere tumultu. Scit Romanus ad huc, & quam Tarpeia videtis Arx attolentem caput illo in monte superbum; Pannones, Aemathii norunt, scit Delphica rupes: Invasions made all Europe through; and like some storme uncouth Of suddaine haile, brought in by force of wind from North or South, A foule stir kept, with hideous noise, what way thy ever went. The Romans and their stately Towre, which rais'd with steep ascent On Tarpie cliffe doth mount aloft, full well this yet doe know Pannonians, Aemathians eke, with Delphick rocke also. And a little after Intravere Asiae fines: prope littora Ponti In gentem crevere novam, quaetenditur usque Ad juga Pamphilium, Garamantica sydera contra, Inter Cappadoces posita & Bythinica regna: They entred then the Asian bounds, neere Pontus shore they go, And grew there to a nation new, extending close unto Pamphylian hils, where opposite the Garamants are seene, Seated the Cappadocians and Bithyne realme betweene. Neither must we here passe over in silence those reasons which others have alleaged to prove the Britans first rising from the Gauls. George Buc, a man both well descen∣ded and well learned, observeth out of Mekercus, that the Germans call a French man Wallon: And when the Saxons of Germany came hither, and heard the Britaines speake Gaul-like, they termed them Walli; that is, Galli, that is to say, Gaules. Bu∣chananus saith moreover, that [ Walch ] doth not simply among the Germans signi∣fie a stranger, but rather in a better sense, a Gaul. And withall, he noteth thus much, that the French at this day doe name that country Galles, which we call Wales: also, that the ancient Scots divided all the British nations into Gaol, and Galle, that is to say, after his Interpretation, into the Gallaeci and the Galli. But if our Britans will needs be descended from the Trojanes, they shall not verily have me to gainesay them: and yet shall they in mine opinion ascribe their originall to the Trojanes best of all, by the old Gauls. For some say, as we reade in Ammianus, that some few who after the destruction of Troy fled, possessed themselves of Gaul at that time void and unpeopled. The British Tongue. But when wee thus consider these languages, we cannot but highly admire and set forth, the divine goodnesse of the most high Creatour toward our Britaines, the posteritie of that ancient Gomer: who although the Romans, Sax∣ons and Normans have subdued them and triumphed over them, yet hitherto have they preserved their old name and originall language safe and sound: notwithstanding the Normans sought to abolish the same even by their lawes enacted for that purpose. Insomuch as an old Britan, one of their nobilitie being demanded of Henry the second, King of England, what he thought of the Britans power and the Kings warlike prepa∣ration made against them, answered not impertinently after this manner; Giraldus in his Topogra∣phy of Wales. This Nation, quoth he, O King, may now by the assaults of your selfe and others be molested, and for the most part destroied or weakned, like as heretofore and oftentimes it hath been. But, be the dis∣pleasure of man what it will, unlesse the wrath of God concur withall, it will never bee utterly wasted and consumed, Neither shall any other nation or language else, (as I suppose) answer in the straight day of judgement before that supreame Iudge (for this angle of the World) what ever may happen furthermore, than the Welsh, that is, the British nation THE NAME OF BRITAINE. B Vt you will say, If Cumero be the primitive name of the Inhabi∣tants, whence comes Albion, whence comes Britaine? which name hath so growne in ure that in some sort it hath caused the other to be quite forgotten. But heare, I pray you, that, where∣of I am most assured, because it is most true. As the selfe same things, may be considered by divers circumstances, so they may be called also by sundry appellations, as Plato teacheth in his Cratylus? f you run over all particulars severally both new and old; you shall find, that every nation was of others called by divers names, from those that they them∣selves used. Thus they that in their native tongue had Israelites to their name, accor∣ding to the Greeks were called Hebrewes and Jewes, and by the Egyptians Huesi, as witnesseth Manetho ; because they had Heardmen for their governours. So the Greeks named them Syrians, who, as Josephus writeth, calleth themselves Aramaeans. They that named themselves Chusians, were by the Grecians of their blacke faces called Ethiopians. Those which after their owne speech were named Celtae, the Greekes termed Galatae, of their milke-white colour, as some would have it, or of their long bush of haire, as I said erewhile. So, they that nominated themselves after their own language Teutsch, Numidians and Hellenes, by the Romans were named Germans, Mauri and Grecians. Even so in those daies, (not to speake of many other), they which in their owne Idiome are called Muselmans, Magier, Czecchi and Besermans, are by all nations in Europe named Turkes, Hungarians, Bohemians, and Tartarians. And even wee our selves in England, called in our naturall speech Englishmen, are named by the Welchmen. Britaines, Irishmen and the high-land Scots, Sasson, that is to say, Saxons. By the same reason we are to deeme, that our ancestours, which termed them∣selves Cumero, were upon some other cause either by themselves or others, named Britaines: From whence the Greekes framed their and delivered the same as it were from hand to hand unto the Romans. This ground being laid let us enquire now into the names of our Island. As for the name Albion I passe not much, Albion. considering that the Greekes gave it to this Isle for difference sake, seeing that all the Islands bordering round about it were called Britanish and Britaines. The Island Britaine saith Plinie, renowned in the Greek records and ours both, lieth betwixt North and West over against Germanie, France and Spaine, but with a great distance betweene them, they being the greatest parts by far of all Europe. Britanni . Albion it had to name when all the Isles adjacent were called Britannies. Where∣upon Catullus writing against Caesar said thus; Hunc Galliae timent, timent Britanniae. Him Gaule doth feare, him Britaine dreads. Who also in the same traine of verses, calleth it the utmost Isle of the West. And it may seeme that this name Albion, Vide Ioseph. Scalig in Ca ul. sprung from the vanitie, the fabulous inventions, and that unconstant levity of the Greeks in coining of names, which they themselves ter∣med . For seeing they have in fabulous wife named Italy Hesperia of Hesperus the sonne of Atlas; France Gallatia of a sonne of Polyphemus: I cannot o∣therwise believe, but that in the same veine also of fabling they called this Island Al∣bion, of Albion Neptunes sonne: which thing Perottus and Lilius Giraldus have put downe in writing. Unlesse a man would derive it rather of , which, as Festus wit∣nesseth, in Greeke signifieth White, whereupon the Alpes also have their appellation. For environed it is with white rocks, which Cicero termeth Mirificas moles, that is, wondrous Piles: and hereof it is that upon the coined pieces bearing the stampe of Antoninus Pius and Severus, The shape or pourtraicture of Britaine. Britaine is pourtraied sitting upon rockes in womans habit. And the British Poets themselves name it Inis wen, that is, The white Isle. To say nothing of Orpheus in his Argonauticks, (if so be they be his), who called the Island next unto Hibernia or Irënis, that is, Ireland, which must needs be this of ours, that is, the white land: and which a few verses before, he may seeme to have named , for . Fracastorius also writing how that pestilent day-fever in Britaine, which commonly we call the British or English swet, hapned by occasion of the soile, De morbis lan∣ agrosis lib. 1. Sweating sicknesse. as if the same had stood much upon plaister, supposeth that this Island gat the name Albion of the said plaisterish soile. As for that pretty tale, how Albion was also called of Albina, one of those thirtie daughters of Dioclesian the King of Syria, which at their very wedding solemnitie, slew their husbands, and being brought hither by ship without rower tooke possession of this Island first, and conceived by spirits, brought forth a breede of giants, who can abide to heare it with∣out indignation, as the most loud lie of some leaud lossell? Neither is there any cause wherefore I should so curiously search, why Britaine, in that ancient A Canticle or Sonet. Insula Caeruli. Parodia against Ventidius Bassus, is named Insula Caeruli, considering that it is compassed round about with the Ocean, which the Poets call Caerulus, and Caerulum. Whereupon Claudian of Britaine, writeth thus: —Cujus vestigîa verrit Caerulus— —Whose feet the Azure Sea Doth sweepe.— I passe over to speake of Aristides, who named it The great, and the furthest Island. That it was called also Romania, ROMANIA. Gildas after a sort doth intimate, who writeth, that subdued it was of the Romans so, as that the name of Roman servitude stuck to the soile there∣of: and by and by after, so as it might not be counted BRITANIA, but ROMANIA: and one or two pages after, speaking of the same, The Island, quoth he, keeping indeed the Roman name, but neither their custome nor law. And prosper Aquitanus in expresse words called it the Roman Island: heereto may bee referred also thus much, that when the Statutes of Tacitus and Florianus the Emperors were by lightning overthrowne, the Soothsayers answered out of their learning, Vopiscusin Flo∣rianum. that an Emperour should arise out of their family, who among other things was to set presidents over Taprobane, and to send a Proconsull to the Roman Island, which the learned understand of our Britaine, that was a Province Haply, go∣verned by Presidents. Samothea. Praesidiall, and never Proconsular, as afterwards wee will declare. But that sometime it was named Samothea of Samothes the sixth Sonne of Iaphet, be∣lieve it who that will, for me. Out of whose shop and forge this comes, I wote full well: even from Annius Viturbiensis forsooth, who under a goodly title, as the man∣ner is of craftie retailers, hath in the name of Berosus published, and thrust upon cre∣dulous persons his owne fictions, and vaine inventions. But touching the name and originall of Britaine, the truth by reason of the divers and sundry wits of men is very doubtfull and wavering. In which point, that I may lawfully interpose mine owne conjecture, I will by way of Preface, beseech our Bri∣tains to speake and think favorably of me, that while they are desirous to learne, they would be willing to pardon, and not debarre me of that course, which Eliot, Leland, Lhuid, and the rest have taken. For if it was lawfull for Humfrey Lhuid a most lear∣ned Britain, without any prejudice at all to Brutus, (nay if hee were commended ra∣ther for it,) to derive the name of Britaine otherwise, than from Brutus; let it not bee imputed as a hainous offence unto me, who am unwilling to impugne the Storie of Brutus, to deduce it from somewhat else, if I can. And that out of the very British tongue, and from nothing else, which as it is least mingled with other languages, and withall most ancient, so in this search it seemeth greatly to helpe and further us. For, ancient tongues are reputed passing necessarie, for the searching out of Originals▪ and Plato teacheth us, That the first names being through the long continuance of time growne out of use, In his Craty∣lus. are preserved in barbarous tongues, as being more ancient than others. And although those things so farre remote from all memory, are o∣ver-cast with such mists and darkenesse, that the truth seemes rather to bee wished than hoped for: yet for all that, will I doe my best to trace out the truth, and declare as briefly as I can, what my judgement is: not minding to put downe ought prejudi∣ciall to any man, but most willing, if any one shall bring more probable matter to welcome and embrace the same. For I affect and love the truth not in my selfe more than in another, and in whom soever I shall see it, I will most willingly and gladly entertaine it. First, by the Readers good leave, I will take this for granted and proved, that an∣cient Nations in the beginning, had names of their owne: and that afterwards, from these, the Greeks and Latines, by wresting them to the analogie or proportion of their speech, imposed names upon regions and countreys: to speake more plainely, That people were knowne by their names, before regions and places, and that the said regions had their denominations of the people. Who can deny that the names of the Jewes, Medes, Persians, Scythians, Almans French or Gauls, Betulians, Saxons, Englishmen, Scots, &c. were before Jewry, Media, Persia, Scythia, Alamaine, France or Gaule, Betulia, Saxonie, England, Scotland, &c. And who sees not, that these words sprang out of the other? Of the Sam ites, Insubres and Belgae, we reade that Livie and Caesar first named the countreys them∣selves Or Samnium. Samnitium, Insubrium, and Belgium. Of the Franci in the time of Constantinus Maximus, as is to be seene in his coines, the place where they were seated took the name of Francia first: & from the Burgundi Si∣donius Appolinaris first framed Burgundie. In the same sort we must of necessitie think, that this our Island Britaine, tooke denomination from the Inhabitants, or from the Gaules their neighbours: Brit. That these first Inhabitants were called Brit or Brith, some things induce me to thinke: First and formost, that verse which goeth about, under the name of Sybilla: Twixt Brits and Gaules their neighbours rich, in gold that much abound, The roaring Ocean Sea with bloud full filled shall resound. Moreover, the authoritie of Martial, Juvenal and Ausonius. Procopius also, who nameth this Isle BRITTA. In like manner the old Inscriptions set up by the Britaines themselves, wherein are read, BRITO, BRITONES, BRITTUS. COH. BRITTON. ORDINIS BRITTON: and at Rome in the Church of Saint Mary the round NATI∣ONE BRITTO: as also in this which is seene at Amerbachium in Germanie, which I will put downe here underneath because it maketh mention of Triputium, a place in Britaine, not knowne. NVMPHISO NO BRITTON TRIPVTIENO SVB CVRA MO VLPI MALCHI Centurionis▪ 7. LEG. XXII PO PO FO. BRIT. The Saxons also themselves called the Britans in their language , and Witi∣chindas the Saxon every where namedth the Britans Britae: so that the word BRIT is doubtlesse the primitive, from whence Brito is derived, and from whence the first glympse of light leading to the word Britaine, seemeth to appeare. Considering now that Nations devised their names of that, wherein they either excelled others or were knowne from others: whether in regard of their first foun∣ders honour; as the Iönes of Javan, the Israelites of Israël, the Chananites of Chanaan the sonne of Cham: or whether in respect of their nature, conditions, and inclinati∣ons; as the Iberi, after the Hebrew Etymologie, because they were miners; the Hene∣ti, for that they were straglers; the Nomades, because they gave themselves to the breeding and feeding of Cattell; the Alemans or Germanes, for that they were estee∣med valiant men; the French or Frankners, for beeing free; the Pannonians, for wea∣ring coats with cloth-sleeves, as Dio conceiteth it: the Ethiopians of their black hue; and the Albanes, because they were borne with white haire: whereupon, (marke I pray you) as Solinus saith, The colour of the haire upon the head gave name unto a people: Seeing also that our countrey men, who were (by a name common to them and their neighbours) called Cimbri and Cumeri, had no marke whereby they might bee distin∣guished and knowne from the borderers, better than by that manner of theirs to paint their bodies: for the most sufficient Authors that be, as Caesar, Mela, Plinie, and the rest doe shew, Glass. that the Britaines coloured themselves with woade, called in Latine Glastum, (and Glass at this day with them signifieth Blew. ) What if I should conjecture, Britans, whence they tooke their name. Brith, what it is. that they were called Britans of their depainted bodies? For, whatsoever is thus painted and coloured, in their ancient countrey speech, they call Brith. Nei∣ther is there cause why any man should thinke this Etymologie of Britaines to be harsh and absurd; seeing the very words sound alike, and the name also as an expresse image representeth the thing, which in Etymologies are chiefly required. For Brith and Brit, doe passing well accord: and that word Brith among the Britans, implieth that which the Britans were indeed, to wit, painted, depainted, died, and coloured, as the La∣tine Poets describe them; Gyn getis. lib. 1. and that is, having their backs pide, or medly colou∣red, as Oppianus termeth them. Neither will it be impertinent, (as small a matter as it is) to note here, that as I have observed, in the names, of well neere all the most ancient Britaines, there appeareth some signification of a colour: Old Britans names, drawn from colours. which no doubt, arose from this kind of painting. The red colour is of the Britaines called Coch and Goch, which in my judgement lieth couched in these names, Cogidunus, Argentocoxus, and Segonax. The same Britaines call the blacke colour, Dû, which after a sort sheweth it selfe in Mandubratius, Cartimandua, Togodumnus, Bunduica, Cogidunus. The white colour is with them named Gwin, the very prints, as it were, and expresse tokens of which word, me thinkes I see in Venutius and Immanuentius. Gwellw among them signifieth that, which Color aqueu among the Latines doth, that is to say, a wan or waterish colour: and this appeareth evidently in the names of Vellocatus, Caruillius and Suella. Glass in the British tongue, is as much as Blew, which is seene in the name of King Cuniglasus. For Gildas inter∣preteth it to be all one with Fulvus, or as some copies have Furvus Lani , that is, a Lion tawnie, or coale blacke Butcher. Aure, which betokeneth a faire yellow or golden colour, bewraieth it selfe in Cungetorius and Arviragus. A lively and gallant colour is with them called Teg, which maketh some little shew in Prasutagus and Ca∣rattacus. But if we be perswaded, that the Britans borrowed the names of mingled colours, together with the very simple colours themselves of the Romans; for cer∣taine it is that they tooke from the Romans, Werith, for Viridis, that is, Greene: Me∣lin, for Melinus, that is a Quince yellow colour: then if I thinke that there lyeth close some note of the colour Prasinus, that is, Leeke-blade greene, in Prasutagus ; and of the red vermillon or Sinopre colour, called of the Latins Minium, in the name of Acli∣minius, King Cinobelinus his sonne, no man I hope will stand against mee. Moreover Rufina, that most learned British Lady, tooke that name of the colour Rufus, that is, sad r d: like as Albane the first martyr in Britaine of Albus, that is, White. And if any one that is skilfull in the old British tongue, would examine the rest of British names, which in the ancient Writers are not past foure or five more in all, wee may well suppose, that he shall find in those names, as few as they be, some signification of a colour. Neither must we omit this observation, that the commonest names at this day among the Britans, That is, Welch men. Gwin, Du, Goch, Lhuid, were imposed upon them, from the white, blacke, red, russet, or tawny colour. So that now it may bee thought no such wonder, that the whole nation it selfe, drew the denomination from painting: considering verily, that they in generall painted themselves: and the very Inhabi∣tants, both in times past, and also in these our daies imposed upon themselves their names, of Colours. But now to the matter, if haply, all this hath beene beside the matter. This also is certaine, that in stories a Britaine is called in the British tongue Brithon. I care not for the note of aspiration, seeing that the Britaines (who, as Chrysostome saith, In serm. Pente∣cost. had a hissing or lisping pronuntiation) delight in aspirations, which the Latines have carefully avoided. Now, as Brito came of Brith, so did Britannia also in my opi∣nion. Britannia, saith Isidore, tooke that name from a word of the owne nation. For what time as the most ancient Greeks (and these were they that first gave the Island that name) sailing still along the shore, as Eratosthenes saith, either as rovers, or as mer∣chants, travailed unto nations most remote and disjoyned farre asunder, and learned either from the Inhabitants themselves, or else of the Gaules, who spake the same tongue, TANIA So as this day the Germans unto the names of countries put to Land , as Gelderlandt, Friestlandt, Pomerlandt, &c. that this nation was called Brith, and Brithon ; then they unto the word BRITH added TANIA: which, as we find in the Greek Glossaries, betokeneth in Greek, a re∣gion: and thereof they made a compound name , that is, the Britons-land, for which they have written false, : But Lucretius and Caesar, the first Latines that made mention thereof, more truely Britannia. That this is so, I doe the more firmely believe, because that besides our Britaine, a man shall not find, over the face of the whole earth above three countries of any account and largenesse, which end in the termination TANIA: and those verily lying in this west part of the world, namely, MAVRITANIA, LVSITANIA, and AQVITANIA. Which names, I doubt not but the Greeks made and delivered to the Latines, as who first discovered and surveied these lands. For, of Mauri they framed Mauritania, as one would say, the countrey of the Mauri, which the home-bred people of that land, as Strabo witnesseth, called Numi∣dia: of Lusus the sonne of Or Bacchus. Liber, Lusitania, as it were, the land of Lusius: and Aquita∣nia, perhaps ab aquis, that is, of waters, as Ivo Carnotensis is of opinion, being a region seated upon waters: in which sense, as Plinie writeth, it was before time named Ar∣morica, that is, coasting upon the sea. As for Turditania and Bastitania, names of smaller countries, they may hereto also be reduced, which likewise were in this we∣sterne tract, to wit, in Spaine, and may seeme to signifie as much as the regions of the Turdi and the Basti. Neither is it a strange and new thing, that a denomination should be compounded, Lib. 1. of a forrein and a Greek word, put together. Names are compounded, saith Quintilian, either of our own, that is, Latine, and of a strange word put together, as Biclinium, that is, a roome with two beds or two tables: and contrariwise, as Epito∣gium, that is, a garment worne upon a gowne; Anticato, that is, a book written against Cato: or of two forrein words joyned in one, as Epirrhedium, a kind of wagon. And this maner of composition is most usuall in the names of countries. Came not Ireland by composition of the Irish word Erin, and the English word Land? Did not Angle∣terre, that is, England, grow together of an English and of a French word? and did not Franclond (for so our Saxons named Francia or France) proceed from a French and Saxon word? Came not Poleland likewise from a Polonian word, which among them betokeneth a plaine, and a Germane? Lastly, was not Danmarch compounded of a Danish word, and the Duch March, which signifieth a bound or limit? But in so plaine and evident a matter I will not use any more words. Neither have we cause to wonder at this Greeke addition TANIA, seeing that S. Hierome in his questions upon Genesis, proveth out of most ancient authors, that the Greeks inhabited along the sea coasts and Isles of Europe throughout, as far as to this our Island. Let us read, saith he, Varroes bookes of Antiquities, and those of Sisinius Capito, as also the Greeke writer Phlegon, with the rest of the great learned men, and we shall see, all the Islands well neere and all the sea coasts of the whole world, yea and the lands neere unto the sea, to have beene taken up with Greeke Inhabitants, who, as I said before, from the mountaines Amanus and Taurus even to the British Ocean, possessed all the parts along the sea side. That the Greeks came to Britaine. And verily, that the Greeks arrived in this our region, viewed and considered well the scite and nature thereof, there will be no doubt and question made; if we observe what Athenaeus hath written concerning Phileas Taurominites (of whom more a∣non) who was in Britaine in the clx. yeare before Caesars comming: if we call to re∣membrance the Altar with an Inscription, Vnto Vlysses, in Greek letters; and lastly, if we marke what Pytheas before the time of the Romans time, hath delivered in wri∣ting as touching the distance of Thule from Britaine. For who had ever discovered unto the Greeks, Britaine, Thule, the The Low countries. Belgicke countries, and their sea coasts especi∣ally, if the Greeks ships had not entred the British and German Ocean, yea and rela∣ted the description thereof unto their Geographers? Had Pytheas, thinke you, come to the knowledge of sixe daies sailing beyond Britaine, unlesse some of the Greeks had shewed the same? Who ever told them of Scandia, Burgos, and Nerigon, out of which men may saile into Thule? And these names seeme to have been better knowne unto the most ancient Greeks, than either to Plinie or to any Roman. Whereupon Mela testifieth, That Thule was much mentioned and renowned in Greek letters: and Plinie likewise writeth thus; Britaine an Island famous in the monuments and records both of the Greeks and of us. By this meanes therefore, so many Greek words have crept into the British, French, & withall, into the Belgicke or low-Dutch language. And if Lazarus Bayfius, Greeke words in the British Language. and Budaeus, do make their vant and glory in this, that their Frenchmen have beene of old , that is, Lovers and Studious of the Greekes, grounding their reason upon few (French) words of that Idiome, which retaine some markes and tokens of the Greek tongue: if Hadrian Junius joyeth no lesse, because in the Belgicke words there ly covertly Greek Etymologies: then may the Britaines make their boast, in whose language many words there be derived from the Greeks. Howbeit, Sir Thomas Smith Knight, In his booke of English Orthographie. sometime Secretary to Queene Elizabeth, a man most learned every way, thinketh verily, that this hapned thereupon, for that when all Europe besides was much troubled and shaken with wars, very many of the Greeks flocked hither for refuge, as it were into a sanctuary. Thus have you, as touching the Originall and name of Britaine mine error or con∣iecture, whether you wil, which if it swerve from the truth, I wish it were by the truth it selfe reformed. In this intricate and obscure study of antiquitie, it is thought praise-worthy, somewhat to erre: and remember we should withall, that such things as at the first sight being slightly thought upon are deemed false, after a better review and further consideration oftentimes seeme true. Now if any man should summon me to appeare before the Tribunall of Verity, I have no other answer at all to make. And as for our countrimen the Britans, such as be of the learneder sort, I doe most earnestly beseech and desire them to employ all their labour, industry, wit, and understanding in the searching out hereof, so lgog, untill at last, the truth with her owne cleare bright beames, may scatter and dissolve all mists of conjectures whatsoever. THE MANERS AND CVSTOMES OF THE BRITAINES. A S concerning the Britaines, what Acts at the first they exploited▪ what forme of common-wealth they used, after what orders and lawes they lived, M. Daniel Rogers, a very good man, excel∣lently well learned, and my especiall friend, promised in his wri∣tings to informe us: but for that he beeing cut off by untimelie death, The Manners of Britaines. hath performed nothing, take here these few notes as touching their ancient maners and customes collected word for word out of ancient authors. Caesar. The Britans use for their money, brazen pieces, or Annulis. Some read, Laminis, that is, thinne plates. rings of iron duly weighed and tried to a certaine just poize. To taste of hare, hen, and goose, they thinke it unlawfull: howbeit, these they keepe for their delight and pleasure. Of them all, these are most civill and curteous by far, that dwell in Kent, which is a country altogether lying upon the sea coast: neither doe these Inhabitants differ much in custome from the Gaules. The Inlanders for the most part sow no corne, but live of milke and flesh; and clad themselves in skins. But the Britans all in generall depaint themselves with Lute wood, that maketh a blew colour; and hereby they are the more terrible to their enemies in fight. The haire of their heads they weare long, and shave all parts of the body, saving the head and upper lip. Ten or twelve of them together use their wives in common, and especially brethren partake with brethren, and parents with their children: but looke what children they beare, theirs they are repu∣ted who first married them virgins. In battell for the most part, they were wont to em∣ploy their chariotiers. First these ride about into all parts of the battell, and fling darts: Essedarii. and with the very fearefull sight of horse, and with the ratling noise of the wheeles, they doe most part breake the rankes and put them in disarray, and when they have once wound themselves within the troopes of the horsemen, they alight from their chariots, and fight on foot. The chariot-guiders in the meane time depart a little out of the medly, and bestow themselves so, that if the other be overcharged with the multitude of enemies, they may readily and without let retyre in safetie. Thus in their battels, they performe the nimble mo∣tion of horsemen, and steadinesse of footmen: by daily practise and experience so ready in their service, that they were wont to stay in the declivity of a steepe hill their horses be∣ing in their full carriere, quickly turne short and moderate their pace, runne along the spire∣pole and beame of the chariot, rest upon the yoke of and harnesse of their steeds, and from thence leape againe into the chariots most speedily at their pleasure. These chariotiers would retire also many times of purpose, and when they had trained and drawne our men a little way off from their legions, dismount from their chariots and encounter them on foot, having thereby the vantage of them in flight. The manner of their Esse∣daries or Cha∣ritiers fight. Furthermore, they never fought thicke and close together, but thinne and with great distance betweene, having set stations or wards of purpose, so as one might succour another, receiving the wearied, and putting forth new and fresh supplies. Strabo. The Britans be taller of stature than the Gauls: their haire not so yellow, nor their bodies so well knit and firme. For proofe of their talenesse, I saw my selfe at Rome very youths and springals, higher by halfe a foote than the tallest man. Mary, they had but bad feet to support them. As for all other lineaments of the body, they shewed good making and proportionable feature. For disposition of nature they partly resemble the Gauls: partly they be more plaine, more rude and barbarous; insomuch that some of them for want of skill, can make no cheeses, albeit they have plenty of milke: others againe, are altogether ignorant in gardening and planting of orchyards, yea and in other points of husbandry. Many Lords and Potentates they have among them. In their warres they use a number of chariots, like as some of the Gauls. Woods stand them in stead of Cities and townes: for when they have by felling of trees, mounded and fensed therewith a spacious round plot of ground, there they build for themselves halles and cottages, and for their cattell set up stals and folds: but those verily for the present use, and not to serve long. Caesar likewise. A towne, the Britaines call some thicke wood, which they have enclosed and fortified with a ditch and rampier, and made for a place of refuge and retrait, to avoid the incursions of the borderers. Diodorus Siculus. The Britans live after the manner of the old world. They use chari∣ots in fight, as the report goes of the ancient Greeks at the Trojane war. Their houses are for the most part of reed or wood. Their corne they inne and house with eare and all: threshing out thereof from band to mouth as their need requires. Faire conditioned people they are, plaine and of upright dealing, far from the subtiltie and craft of our men. Their food where∣upon they live is simple, and nothing daintie nor like the full fare of rich men. Their Island is replenished with people. Pomponius Mela. Britaine bringeth forth nations and Kings of Nations, but they be all uncivill, and the farther they are from the continent, the lesse acquainted they be with other kind of riches: onely in catell and lands they be wealthy. Their bodies are died with wo d, whether it bee for to make a gallant shew, or for what else, it is uncertaine. They pick quarel, of warre at their pleasure to satisfie their owne wills, and so oftentimes molest one another: but principally upon an ambitious desire of rule and soveraigntie, Glasto vel vitro. See before. and an encroaching mind they have to enlarge their owne possessions. Their fight is not only with horse or footmen, but also with wagons and chariots harnessed and armed after the Gaul-like manner, such as they call Covinos: and in those they use axeltrees armed at both ends with hookes and sithes. Cornelius Tacitus. The Britans neerest unto France. Gallia resemble likewise the Gaules▪ either because they retaine still somewhat of the race from which they descended, or that in countries butting one against another the same aspects of the heavens doe yield the same complexion of bodies, But generally, if a man consider all, it is most likely, the Gaules which lay neerest peopled the land unto them. In their ceremonies and superstitious perswation, there is to bee seene an apparant conformitie: The language differeth not much: Like bold∣nesse to challenge and set into dangers: when dangers are come, like feare in refusing: Sa∣ving that the Britans make more shew of courage, as beeing not mollified yet with long peace. For the Gaules also were once, as we read, redoubted in war, till such time as giving them∣selves over to ease and idlenesse, cowardise crept in, and shipwrack was made both of man∣hood and libertie together. And so is it also befallen to those of the Britans which were sub∣dued of old: The rest remaine such as the Gaules were before. Their strength in the field consisteth of footmen. Yet some countries there, make war in wagons also. The greater per∣sonage guideth the wagon, his waiters and followers fight out of the same. Heretofore they were governed by Kings, now they are drawne by petty Princes into Partialities and Facti∣ons: and this is the greatest helpe wee Romans have, against those puissant Nations, that they have no common counsell. Seldome it chanceth that two or three States meete together and concur to repulse the common danger: So, whilst one by one fighteth, all are subdued. In another place. An usuall manner it was with the Britans to seeke for the direction of the Gods, by looking into the inwards of beasts: and to make warre under the conduct of women; neither mattereth it whether sex beare rule over them. Whereupon learned men thinke Aristotle spake of the Britaines, where he writeth, That certaine warlike nations beyond the Celtes, Politic. lib. 2. cap. 7. were subject to the government of women. Dio Nicaeus, out of the Epitome of Xiphilinus, as touching the Britans in the North part of the Island. They till no ground: They live upon prey, venison and fruits. For of fish, although there is exceeding great plenty thereof, they will not taste: their abode is in tents, naked and unshod: Wives they use in common, and the children borne of them they all doe foster among them: the Comminaltie for the most part doth governe: most willing they bee to practise robbing. In warre, their service is out of Chariots: the horses they have be little and swift of pace: their footmen runne most speedily: whiles they stand, they bee strongest: the armour and weapons that they use, are a shield and short speare, in the nea∣ther part whereof, there hangeth a round bell of brasse like an apple, that when it is shaken, they might with the sound terrifie and maskre the enemies: they have daggers also. But principally, they can endure hunger, cold, and any labour whatsoever. For, sticking fast in the bogs up to the head many daies together, they will live without food; and within the woods they feed upon the barks and roots of trees. A certaine kind of meat they provide ready for all occasions, whereof if they take but the quantitie of a Beane, they are not wont ei∣ther to be hungrie or thirstie. Herodian. They know no vse at all of garments, but about their belly onely and necke, they weare yron; supposing that to be a goodly ornament, and a proofe of their wealth, like as all other Barbarians esteeme of gold. For why? their very bare bodies they marke with sundry pictures, representing all manner of living creatures; and therefore it is verily, that they will not be clad, for hiding (forsooth) that painting of their bodies, Now they are a most warlike nation, and very greedy of slaughter, content to bee armed onely with a narrow shield and a speare, with a sword besides hanging downe by their na∣ked bodies. Vnskilfull altogether how to use either corslet or helmet, supposing the same to be an hinderance unto them, as they passe over the bogs and marish grounds: through the hot vapours arising, from whence the skie and aire is there most part foggie. The rest of the particulars, The Britans Art Magicke. which are very few, I will lightly gather, and crop here and there. Plinie writing of Magicke: But what should I (quoth he) rehearse these things, in an art that hath passed over the Ocean also, so far, as beyond which, nothing is to be disco∣vered but aire and water? And even at this day verily, it is in Britaine highly honoured, where the people are so wholly devoted unto it, and that with all compliments of ceremonies, as a man would thinke the Persian learned all their Magicke from them. The same Plinie▪ Glastum. There groweth an hearbe in Gaule like unto Plantine, named Glastum, that is, Woad, with the juce whereof, the women of Britaine, as well married wives, as their young daughters annoint and die their bodies all over; resembling by that tincture the co∣lour of Aethiopians, in which manner they use at some solemne feasts and sacrifices to goe all naked. Chenerotes. Brants or Soland gecle. Againe, Their is not a daintier dish of meate known in Britain, than are the Chene∣rotes, fowles lesse than wild geese. Also, The Britaines w re rings on their middle finger. Likewise, The Britaines manured their grounds with Marle in stead of dung. That they inammelled or branded themselves (as it were) with certain marks which Tertullian termeth Britannorum stigmata, Their manner of painting. that is, The Britans marks, Solinus sheweth: The Countrey (saith he) is partly peopled with Barbarians, who by the meanes of artificiall incisions of sundry formes, have from their childhood divers shapes of beasts incorporate up∣on them: and thus having these their markes deepely imprinted within their bodies, looke how a man groweth more and more, so doe these pictured characters likewise waxe. Nei∣ther doe these savage Nations repute any thing to signifie their patience, more than by such durable skars to cause their limbs to drinke in much painting and colour. Dio. Andates. The Britaines worshipped as their Goddesses, Andate, that is, Victorie and Adraste. Caesar and Lucan. The Britans Navigation. Ships they had, of which the Keeles, the footstocks also, or upright standards were made of light timber: the rest of the body framed of windings and Oyster was covered over with leather. Solinus. How long soever they held on their course under sayle, so long the Saylors for∣bare to eat. They used a drinke made of barley: and so doe wee at this day, as Diosco∣rides writeth, Curmi. who nameth Curmi wrong for Kwrw, for so the Britaines call that, which we terme Ale. Many of them together had but one wife among them, as Eusebius recordeth in Evan∣gelica Praeparatione 6. Plutarch reporteth, That they lived one hundred and twenty yeares, for that the cold and frozen countrey wherein they dwelt, kept in their naturall heat. But what those ancient times of cruell Tyrants were, The Tyrants of Britaine. whereof Gildas writeth, I know not, unlesse he meaneth them that in this countrey tooke upon them the sway of government against the Romans, and were at that time called Tyrants: for soone after, he addeth thus much out of S. Hierome: Porphyrie raging in the East-parts as a mad dog against the Church, annexed thus much to his furious and vaine stile: Britaine (saith he) a Province plentifull of tyrants. Neither will I speake of their ancient religion, which is not verily to be counted religion, The religion of the Britans. but a most lamentable and confused Chaos of Su∣perstitions: For when Satan had drowned the true doctrine in thicke mists of darke∣nesse, The ugly spectres of Britaine (saith that Gildas) were meere Diabolicall, exceeding well neere in number those of Egypt: whereof some we doe see within or without desert walles, with deformed lineaments still, carrying sterne and grim lookes after their wonted manner. But, whereas it is gathered, that the Britaines were together with Hercules at the rape of Hesione, and that, out of these verses which they take to bee made by Corne∣lius Nepos, whiles he describeth the marriage of Telamon and Hesione: —Et in aurea pocula fusi Invitant sese pateris plebs mista, Britanni. Mid cups of gold, a medly sort thus lying all along, Boll after Boll quaft lustily, and Britans them among. That is altogether poeticall, and I can cleerely by good evidences, as it were, un∣der hand and seale prove, that the author thereof, was not, as the Germans would have it, Cornelius Nepos, but one Ioseph of Excester: who hath made mention of our King Henrie the second, and Thomas, Archbishop of Canterburie. Brodaeus Mis∣cellan. lib. 3. cap. 4. Vlysses never in Britaine. Whether Ulysses entred thus farre, whose arrivall in Caledonia, a certaine altar engraven with Greeke letters, as Solinus saith, hath testified, Brodaeus maketh doubt: and I would judge, that erected it was rather in the honour of Ulysses, than by Ulys∣ses himselfe: although they avouch Ulysses to bee the very same Elizza, that was Japhets sonne. For, apparant it is out of Histories, and alreadie I have said as much, that the most ancient Greeks undertooke long voyages by sea and land: no marvell then it ought to seeme, if their be also some names and monuments of theirs found in divers places. And often times they derived those names, not so much from their owne denominations, as from Worthies, who were held in as much reverence, if not more, among them, as were either Confessors or Martyrs among Christians. Like as therefore the names of Saint John, Saint Dominicke, Saint Francis, and infinite other Saints departed, are imposed upon new-found places, so also that it hapned time out of mind with the Greeks, who will denie? but who among all the worthies, made either more wandring voyages, or of longer continuance at Sea, than did Vlysses? No marvell then, if Sailers made vowes very often unto him above all others; and unto those places where they arrived and landed, did consecrate according to their vowes, names from him. Thus Lisbon. Vlyssippo upon the mouth of the river Tagus tooke the name: and thus elsewhere other monuments of Vlisses, Laertes and their com∣panions; which are not properly to be referred unto Vlysses as the founder: but wee must think, that by the Greeks who discovered strange and forraine coasts, they were dedicated in the honour of that Worthy, who of all others had travelled and seene most. Whereas John Tzetzes in his Treatise intituled, Varietie of Stories, hath written, that our British Kings bestowed upon that renowned Cato the elder, who had per∣petuall conflict with the manners of the Roman people, certaine presents for his ver∣tues sake; let him make good and save his owne credit himselfe: yet thus much all the world knoweth, how that Writer is full fraught with fables. Neither would I have you believe, that Alexander the Great came out of the East Indies, to Gades, and so forward to Britaine, howsoever Cedrenus, maugre all other Historiographers, King Alexan∣der the Great, never in Bri∣taine. writeth thus: : that is, And from thence being come unto Phasis, Gades, and the British nation, and having furnished himselfe with a thousand hulkes &c. Of the same stampe is that also which Trithemius reporteth out of Hunnibald, that King Bassianus put away his wife, the King of the Orkneys daughter, in the 284. yeare be∣fore the birth of Christ, and thereupon he with the aid of the Britaines Kings, made warre upon Bassianus. Hannibal ne∣ver in Britaine. Nor let any man thinke that Hanniball ever warred in Britaine, because wee read thus in Polybius in the Eclogues of his tenth Booke . Thus much in briefe; now that Hanniball was enclosed within the streights of Britaine. For the place is corrupt, and for it should bee read , as it is in Dio, booke 42. For in both places there is a speech of the Brutii in Italie. And yet I may not deny, but that about this time the Greeks came to our Island. For, Atheraeus in descri∣bing out of Moschion a most ancient author, King Hiero his ship. that ship of Hiero, at the hugenesse and workemanship whereof all men wondred, reporteth, that the maine mast thereof was with much adoe found by a certaine swineheard in the mountaines of Britaine, and by Phileas Taurominites the Mechanick conveied into Sicilie. But I feare, lest the Criticks judge that the true reading here also should bee for , and like∣wise understand it of the Brutian mountaine in Italy. Britaines with the Cimbri in their expedi∣tions. But it seemeth, that the Britaines were entermingled with the Cimbri and the Gaules in those expeditions which were made into Italy and Greece. For, besides the name common to them both, it is recorded in a most ancient British Booke enti∣tuled Triadum, The bookes of Triades. wherein mention is made of three mightie hosts leavied from among the Britans, That a certaine forrain captaine leavied a marvellous puissant army from hence, which having wasted a great part of Europe, at the last sat him downe and a∣bode hard by the Greekish sea (meaning perhaps Gallatia). Brennus. That Brennus a King so famous in Greek and Latine writers both, was a Britan, there be that thinke they can easily prove. For mine owne part, thus much onely I know, that his name is not yet growne out of use with the Britans, Brennin. who in their language call a King Brennin, whe∣ther in honorable memory of him I dare not determine. Certes, that Britomarus the militare captaine among them, Britomarus a Britaine. of whom Florus and Appian speake, was a Britan, the verae name doth evince, which signifieth as much, as A great Britan. Neither will I wrey to my purpose for to make the said Brennus a Britan borne, that place of Stra∣bo, wherein he writeth, That Brennus was by birth a Prausian. Ne yet dare I (where∣as Ottho Frisingensis writeth, Lib. 2. cap. 13. That the Briones, a generation of the Cimbri, seated themselves at the head of the river Dravus, ) change Briones into Britones. And yet what dare not our Criticks doe now adaies? But yet truely, to speake my mind once for all: As the Romans for all they grew to that greatnesse above others, were not for a long time knowne, either to Herodo∣tus or to the Greeks; the Gaules also and the Spaniards for many yeares utterly un∣knowne to the old Historiographers: Late ere Bri∣taine was knowne to the Greeks. so, of this mind I have alwaies beene, that late it was ere the Greeks and Romans heard of the Britans name. For, that little booke, Of the World, which commonly goeth abroad under the name of Aristotle, and ma∣keth mention of the Britans, of Albion and Hierne, is not so ancient as the time wher∣in Aristotle lived, but of later daies by far, as the best learned men have judged. Po∣lybius verily, the famous Historian, who accompanying that noble Scipio travelled over a great part of Europe ccclxx. yeares or there about before Christs nativitie, is the ancient author, as far as I remember, that mentioneth the Britan Isles, where hee writeth: Lib. 3. Of the utmost Ocean, the Britan Isles, the plenty of tynne, gold and silver in Spaine, old writers with different opinions, have reported much. But they seeme to have beene little more than by name may bee gathered by this hee writeth before in the same booke. Whatsoever, saith he, betweene Tanis and Narbo bendeth Northward, to this day there is no man knoweth: and whoever they be, that either speake or write any thing there∣of, they doe but dreame. And no lesse may they seeme to do in these daies, who in a pro∣digall humour of credulitie are perswaded, that Himilco beeing commanded by the State of Carthage to discover the Westerne sea-coast of Europe, entred into this Isle many yeares before that time, seeing we have no records of the said navigation, but onely a verse or two in Festus Avienus. But why it was so late ere Britaine was knowne, the reason may seeme to be, partly the scite of the Island so remote and dis∣joyned from the continent: and in part, for that those old Britans, then barbarous as all other people in these parts, and living close to themselves, had no great commerce and traffique with other nations. And surely in this point Dio is of the same opinion. The ancientest, saith he, as well of Greeks as Romans knew not for certaine so much as that there was any Britaine at all: and those of later times after them, made question whether it were the maine or an Island: and much writing there was pro & contrà of both opinions, by those who verily had no assured knowledge thereof (as who had neither seene the countrey nor learned of the native Inhabitants of what nature it was) but relied onely upon bare con∣jecture every one according to his time and diligence emploied that way. But the first La∣tine writer to my knowledge, that made mention of Britaine, was Lucretius in these verses concerning the difference of aire: Nam quid Britannum caelum differre putamus, Et quod in Aegypto est, quà mundi claudicat axis? For aire, what difference is there in Britaine Isle thinke we, And Aegypt land, where Artick pole to stoupe men plainly see? Now that Lucretius lived but a little before Caesar, no man denieth: at what time we are taught out of Caesar himselfe, that Divitiacus King of the In France. Soissons, and the most mightie Prince of all Gaule governed Britaine. But this is to bee understood of maritime coasts. For Caesar himselfe witnesseth, that no part of Britaine, save onely the sea-side, and those countreys which lie against Gaule, was knowne unto the Gauls. Howbeit, Diodorus Siculus writeth, that Britaine had experience of no for∣reiners rule: for neither Bacchus. Dionysius, nor Hercules, nor any other Worthy or Demigod have we heard to have attempted war upon that people. Now Caesar, who for his no∣ble Acts is called Divus, was the first that subdued the Britans, and forced them to pay a certaine tribute. Censorinus de Die Natali. From this time and no further off, must the writer of our Historie fetch his begin∣ning, of his worke, if he throughly weigh with judgement what the learned Varro hath in times past written, and my selfe already heretofore signified: Namely, that there bee of times three differences: Three times or ages of the world. the first from the creation of man unto the Floud or Deluge, which for the ignorance of those daies is called , that is Ob∣scure & uncertaine: Vncertaine. the second from the Floud to the first Olympias, (being 3189. years after the Creation, and 774. before Christ) which in regard of many fabulous narrati∣ons reported in that time, Fabulous. is named , that is, Fabulous: the third from the first Olympias unto our daies, Historicall. and that is termed , that is, Historicall, be∣cause the Acts therein done, are contained in true Histories. And yet I am not igno∣rant, that albeit the learned nations (setting aside the Hebrews) have attained to the knowledge of nothing before this age, yet the British History of Geffrey, tooke be∣ginning three hundred and thirtie yeares before the first Olympias, being a very rude and ignorant age in these parts, which he called Fabulous. And even from hence, for feare least the ground-worke being ill laid, the rest of the building would goe on no better, because both the present place seemeth to require it, and also from it the chiefe light may arise to the traine of the narration ensuing; let mee summarily gathering matter heere and there briefly deliver the acts of the Romans in Britaine, not out of feined fables, which were vanitie to recite, and meere folly to beleeve, but out of the incorrupt and ancient monuments: wherein, I will not intercept matter of glory and commendation from them, who shall take in hand to pursue this argument in more ample manner. ROMANS IN BRITAINE. W Hen Fortitude and Fortune were so agreed, or Gods appoint∣ment rather had thus decreed, Iulius Caesar. that Rome should subdue all the earth, Caius Julius Caesar, having now by conquests over-run France. Gaule, to the end, that by a successive traine of victories at∣chieved both by land and sea, Pomponius Sabinus out of Seneca. he might joyne those Lands to∣gether which nature had severed, (as if the Roman world would not suffice) cast an eye unto the Ocean; and in the foure and fiftieth yeare before the incarnation of Christ, endeavou∣red to make a journey into Britaine; either for that in all his Gaulish warre, there came under-hand aid from thence, or because the Britaines had received the Those a∣bout Beau∣vois or Beau∣vosin. Bellovaci that were runne from him, or as Suetonius writeth, allured with hope of the British pearles, the bignesse and weight whereof hee was wont to peize and trie by his hand; or rather upon an ardent de ire of glorie: which wee must most easily believe, consi∣dering that he rejected the Embassadors of the Britaines, who having intelligence of his designement, repaired unto him, and promised to put in hostages, and to become obedient to the Roman Empire. But his entrance into the Island, I wil compendiously set down, even in his own very words: Considering the coasts, ports, and landing places of Britaine, were not well knowne unto Caesar, he sent C. Volusenus before with a galley, to discover what he might; who, ha∣ving taken what view of the countrey hee could in five daies space, returned. In the meane time, the resolution of Caesar being made knowne unto the Britans by merchants, many par∣ticular States sent their Embassadours to him into Gallia, promising both to put in pledges, and also to submit themselves unto the Roman Empire. Having then exhorted these to con∣tinue in that mind still, he sent them home backe againe, and together with them Comius of Atrebatens. Arras, a man in those countreys of great authoritie, (for the Those of Ar∣ras, and the territories a∣bout it. Attrebates had before time departed out of Gaule, and planted themselves there) to perswade the said Cities vnd States to accept of the friendship and protection of the people of Rome. No sooner was hee set a shore, but the Britaines cast him into prison and hung irons upon him. Meane while, Cae∣sar having gotten together and put in readinesse about fourescore ships of burden, for the transporting of two Legions, and eighteene others besides, which hee appointed for the horsemen, put out to sea from the countrey of the The coast of Picardy. Morini at the third watch, and a∣bout the fourth houre of the day arrived upon the coast, at an unfit landing place: For the hilles lay so steepe over the sea, that from the higher ground a dart or javelin might easily be cast vpon the shore beneath. Having therefore at one time both wind and tide with him, hee weighed anchor, and sailed eight miles from that place unto a plaine and open shore, and there hee rid at anchor. But the Britaines perceiving the Romans determination, sent their horse and chariots before, and there kept the Romans from landing. Here the Romans were exceeding much distressed; For, the ships were so great, that they could not ride neere unto the shore, where the sea was ebbe: the souldiers in strange and unknowne places, being loden with heavie armour, were at one instant to leape downe of necessitie from those tall ships, withall to stand amid the very billowes, and to fight with their enemies: whereas con∣trariwise the Britaines were perfect in the knowledge of those places, lightly appointed, as having all parts of their bodies at libertie, fought either from the dry shore where they had sure footing, or wading not farre into the water. Hereupon the Romans being terrified, beha∣ved not themselves with the like courage and alacritie as before time. But after that Caesar had caused the Gallies to be remooved from those hulkes, to bee rowed and laid a∣gainst the open side of the Britaines, and so from thence the enemie to be beaten backe, and displaced with slings, ordinance, and shot of arrowes; the Britans being troubled with the strange forme of those Gallies, the stirring of the Oares, and the unusuall kind of their en∣gines, reculed. Then the Eagle-bearer of the tenth Legion, earnestly beseeching the Gods, that it might fall out happily for the Legion: Leape downe, quoth he, my fellow souldiers, un∣lesse ye will forsake your standerd and betray it into the enemies hands: For mine owne part, I will bee sure to doe my devoir both to the common-weale and also to my Generall: so forth∣with hee cast himselfe into the sea, and began to advance the That is the maine stan∣dard. Eagle against the enemie: then, all the rest followed hard at his heeles ( But if we believe In Caesaribus. Julian, Caesar himselfe was the first that came downe from his ship ). The fight on both parts was very eager. But the Romans encombred with their heavie armor and weapons, tossed with the waves, not able to get any firme footing, and put out of array, were wonderfully troubled; untill such time as Caesar had caused the ship-boats, pinnaces and smaller vessels to bee manned with souldiers; and when he saw need of helpe sent them to rescue such as were over∣charged. As soone as the Romans got footing on the dry land, they made head together, charged the Britaines and put them to flight: but they were not able to follow them in chace, for want of the horsemen, that were not arrived in the Island. The Britaines beeing over∣throwne in battell, presently dispatched Embassadors unto Caesar to treat of peace, and together with them the foresaid Comius of Arras, whom they had detained bound in pri∣son: and withall, laid the fault upon the multitude, and excused all by their owne ignorance. Caesar soone pardoned them, and commanded hostages to be delivered unto him: which they presently performed in part, and gave their word to bring in the rest. Thus was peace conclu∣ded foure daies after that Caesar was landed in Britaine. At the same time, those eighteene ships which transported the horsemen, approching so neare the coast of Britanny that they were within view, by reason of a suddaine tempest that arose, were cast upon the west part of the Island: from whence with much adoe they reco∣vered the continent of France. In the same night also it hapned, that the Moone being in the full, and the tides very high; both the Gallies which were drawne up to the shore, were filled with the tide, and the ships of burden also that lay at anchor, so shaken with the tem∣pest, that they became altogether unserviceable. This beeing knowne to the Princes of Bri∣taine, when they understood also, that the Romans now wanted horsemen, shipping, and provision of corne, they rebelled and resolved to cut off their provision of graine. Caesar suspecting that which fell out indeed, brought corne daily out of the fields into his campe, and with the timber and other stuffe of those twelve ships which were most weather beaten and dismembred, repaired the rest. While these things were in action, the seventh Legion, being sent out to fetch in corne, and busie in reaping▪ the Britains suddenly set upon, and so with their horsemen and chariots all at once, encompassed them round about. Essedarii, Cha∣riotiers. The manner of their fight from out of these chariots, is thus, as I related a little before: First, they ride up and downe into all parts, and cast their darts; and with the very terrour of the horses, and ratling of the wheeles, often times disorder the rankes, and when they have wound themselves betweene any troups of horsemen, they forsake their chariots, and fight on foot. In the meane time the guiders of the chariots, drive a little a side out of the bat∣tell, and place their chariots so, as that if the other chance to bee overcharged with the multi∣tude of enemies, they might have an easie passage unto them againe. Thus they performed in all their fights the nimble motion of horsemen, and the firme stabilitie of footmen: so ready with daily practise & exercise, that in the declivity of a steepe hill, they could stay their horses in the very full cariere, quickly turn short, & moderate their pace, run along the beame or spire of the Chariot, stand upon the yoke and harnesse of the horses, yea, and from thence whip in a trice into their chariots again. But by the cōming of Caesar to rescue them in so good time, the Romans took heart afresh, and the Britans stood still, who having conceived good hope to free themselves for ever, presuming upon the small number of the Roman forces, together with the scarcitie of corne among them, had assembled a great power, and were come to the campe of Caesar. But he received them even before the campe with a battell, put them to rout, slew many of them, and burnt their houses far and neare. The same day came messengers from the Britans to Caesar, intreating peace, which they obtained: upon condition, that they should dou∣ble the number of their hostages, whom he commanded to be brought into Gaule. And streight after, because the In Autumne or September, when daies and nights are equall. Aequinox was at hand, hee put to sea, hoised saile from Britaine, and brought all his ships safe unto the continent of France. And thither, two onely of all the States of Britaine sent hostages unto him, the rest neglected it. These exploits thus performed, up∣on the relation of Caesars Letters, the Senate decreed a solemne procession for the space of twentie daies: although he gained nothing to himselfe, nor to Rome, but the glorie onely of an expedition enterprized. Dio. lib. 39. The yeare next ensuing, Caesar having gotten together a great fleet, for what with ships for convoy of corne and victuals, and what with other private vessels that every man had built for to serve his owne turne, there was 800. saile and above, and the same manned with five Legions, and 2000. horsemen, he launched from the port called Neere Calais. Iccius, and lan∣ded his forces in that part of the Isle, where hee did the yeare before. Neither was there an enemie to be seene in the place. For albeit the Britans had beene there assembled with a great power, yet terrified with so huge a number of ships, they had secretly withdrawne them∣selves into the upland countrey. Here Caesar encamped in a place convenient, and left two cohorts, and three hundred horsemen as a garrison or guard for his ships. Himselfe having by night marched forward twelve miles, espied the enemies: who having gone forward as farre as to the river, began to give battell: but beaten backe by the cavallery, they conveighed themselves into a wood, and there lay hid, as lodging in a place strongly fortified, both by na∣ture and mans hand. But the Romans with a Testudo, or targnet-roofe, which they made, and mount that they raised against their fortifications, tooke the place, and drave them out of the woods; neither followed they them with any long pursuit, for they were to fortifie the campe in that very place. The next day, Caesar divided his forces into three regiments, and sent them out to pur∣sue the Britaines: but straightwaies called them back againe, for that hee had intelligence by messengers of such a tempest at sea the night before, that his navie was sore beaten, run one against another, and cast on shore. And thereupon himselfe in person returned to the ships, and with the labour of ten daies haled them all up to land, and enclosed them and his campe to∣gether within one and the same fortification, and so goeth to the place from whence he was re∣turned. Thither also had the Britaines assembled themselves with greater forces, under the conduct of Cassivellaunus or Cassibelinus, Cassibelinus. unto whom, in a publike counsell of all the Britains, the whole government and managing of the warre was committed; whose cavallery and chariotiers together, gave the Romanes a sharpe conflict in their march, wherein many of both sides lost their lives: But the Britans after some intermission of time, whiles the Ro∣mans were busie in fortifying their campe, charged fiercely upon those that kept ward before the campe; unto whom when Caesar had sent for rescue two cohorts, and those the principall and choysest of two legions, they most boldly, and with full resolution, brake through the thickest of the enemies, and from thence retired in safety. The next morrow, the Britans shewed themselves here and there in small companies from the hils; but about noone they made an assault upon three legions, and all the horsemen sent out for to forage; yet beaten backe they were, and a great number of them slaine. Now by this time were all their auxi∣liarie forces that had met together, departed; neither encountred they afterward the Ro∣mans with their maine power. Caesar then marched with his army to the river Thames, and so to the confines of Cassivelaunus: The river Thames. Vpon the farther banke of this river, yea and under the water, they had covertly stucke sharpe stakes, and embattelled themselves with a great power. But the Romans went and waded over with such violence, notwithstanding they had but their heads cleere above the water, that the enemy was not able to endure the charge, but left the banke, and betooke themselves to flight: not skared, as Polyaenus writeth, at the sight of an Elephant with a turret upon his backe. Cassivellaunus having now no courage to contend any longer, retained onely foure thou∣sand Charioters with him, and observed the Romanes journeys: and so often as their horse∣men went foorth and straied out in the fields for forage or booty, he sent out his chariots, and kept them from ranging all abroad. Meane while, the Trinobant Trinobantes submit themselves unto Caesar, and intreated that he would defend Mandubratius (whom Eutropius and Beda out of the Fragments of Suetonius now lost, call Androgorius, and our Britans Androge∣us) from the oppression of Cassivellaunus, and send him unto them to be their soveraign, Of them Caesar required and received forty hostages, and corne for his army, and therewith sent Mandubratius. Then the Where i Essex and Middlese Manduba who also nomed A drogeus. Now Norfolke Cambrid Hunting shire. Cenimagi About Holeshot Silecester Segontiaci, The H dred of H ly upon Thames. Ancatites, The hu dred of and Cais Bibroci aad Atrebas. Cassij, following the example of the Trinobantes yeeld unto Caesar: By whom he understood, that Cassivellaunus his towne was not far off, fortified with woods and bogs: which as he assaul∣ted in two severall places, the Britans flung out at a back way: but many of them in their flight were taken and put to the sword. Whiles these things were a doing, foure pety Kings that ruled Kent, to wit Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus and Segonais, by a mandate from Cassivellaunus did set upon the campe where the Romanes navy was kept, but by a sally that the Romanes made, they were driven backe: and Cingetorix one of the said Kings was taken prisoner. Then Cassivellau∣nus, having received so many losses, and troubled most of all with the revolt of the states, sent Embassadour to Caesar by Conius of Atrebas. Arras, tending unto him a surrendry. Where∣upon Caesar, being determined to winter in the continent of France, commanded pledges to be brought unto him, and imposed a yeerly tribute that Britaine should pay unto the people of Rome. But withall he inhibited Cassivellaunus and commanded him to doe no harme either to Mandubratius or the Trinobants. And thus with a great number of captives he em∣barked his army, and transported it backe at two severall passages. Thus much Caesar of his owne warre in Britain. But Eutropius out of some writings of Suetonius now not extant, addeth thus much moreover. Scaeva one of Caesars souldiers, with foure other fellow servitours, crossed over sea before, Scaeva. in a small barke unto a rocke neere the Iland, and by the reflow or ebbe of the Ocean the while, was there left. The Britans many in number set upon the Romanes being but few: howbeit the rest who here and there had been his companions returned in a ship: Scae∣va tarieth behind still undanted, notwithstanding he was overlaid with darts from every side: First he made resistance with his pike or massie speare: and at length tooke him to his sword and fought alone with many of them. When he was weary and wounded, and had with∣all lost his helmet and target after many a stroke, with two habergeons he swum unto Caesars campe, and craved pardon of his Generall for his fool hardy rashnesse: whom Caesar advan∣ced to the honor and degree of a Centurion. When Caesar came first into this Isle, (as Cotas, one who then in the campe had the second place, Athenaem. hath put downe in a Greeke Commentary of his, concerning the Romane Common-wealth) of such temperance he was, and so far short of the pompe of our age, that he had no more servants and attendants ordinarily in his domesticall retinue, but three. What time as Caesar, saith Seneca, travelled into Britaine, and could not containe his owne felicitie within the Ocean, he heard that his daughter was departed this life, drawing with her a traine of publike calamities, But he passed over this griefe of heart as lightly as he was wont all things else. Being returned with conquest out of Britaine, he dedicated un∣to Venus genitrix in her temple, Plinie. a breast-plate made of British pearles. Some of his Bri∣tish prisoners, he appointed for services in the Theatre, and about these rich hangings of Tapestrie there, Servius Hono∣ratus. wherein he had woven in colours his victories in Britaine. Which the Britans were wont, being themselves therein wrought, to remove and take away; whereupon Virgill, Purpurea{que} intextitollant auleae Britanni. Let Britans purple Tapestrie rid, wherein themselves are wrought. Neither were the Britans appointed to the ministeries, and offices onely about the Theatre, but also (I note it by the way) to the Emperors Licter, as it appeareth ma∣nifestly by an antique inscription of this age, wherein there is made mention of a De∣curio, over the British Licter-bearers. Of this victorie of Caesar, an old Poet hath thus written: In the Gar∣dens of the Cardinall de Carpento. Vis invicta viri reparatâ classe Britannos Vicit, & hostiles Rheni compescuit undas. Lo here the mans undaunted heart! with navie rigged new, He Britans vanquish'd, and fell waves of Rhene he did subdue. Hitherto may be referred those verses also of Claudian, touching the valour of the Romanes. Nec stetit Oceano, remis{que} ingressa profundum, Vincendos alio quaesivit in orbe Britannos. In Ocaan rhode it rested not, nor put to sea for nought, But Britads in their otherworld, for conquest sake it sought. Moreover Cicero in a certaine Poeme now lost, which hee entituled Quadrigas, caried Caesar in poeticall Chariots of triumph, through the midst of all praise and com∣mendation, for his acts atchieved in Britainc, as Ferrerius of Piemont perswadeth us: for thus he writeth, Pingam Britanniam coloribus tuis, penecillo autem meo, that is, I will depaint Britaine in your colours, but with mine owne pencill. Howbeit in the judgement of others, he terrified onely the Britans with a fortunate fight, or as Lucane (who no∣thing favoured the house of the Caesars) wrote; Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis. He sought the Britans, and for feare to them his backe he shew'd. And Tacitus a right grave and substantiall author, writeth, That he discovered onely, but delivered not unto the Romanes, Britaine: and Horace implieth, that he scant touched them at all, when to flatter Augustus, hee saith, That the Britaine was not medled with∣all, in these words: Intactus Britannus ut descenderet Sacrâ catenatus uiâ: Or that the Britans heretofore not dealt withall in fight, Might, chained now, the sacred street descend, in all mens sight. And Propertius, Te manet invictus Romano Marte Britannus. The Britans yet unconquered by Romanes, stay for thee. So farre it is off, that it should be true which Velleius Paterculus, a flattering Histo∣rian of the Emperours Court wrote, Bis penetrata Britannia à Caesare, that is, twise Cae∣sar passed through Britaine, Dio. when as hee scarce made entry into it: For, many yeeres af∣ter this entrance of Caesar, this Island was left to the free government of their owne Kings, and used their owne Lawes. Augustus seemeth of purpose, and with good advise to have neglected Britaine, when as he called that * Consilium, as Tacitus saith, that is, Policie, or a point of state, haply because it was thought the best pollicie, and safest for the State, That the Ro∣mane Empire should be kept, and held within bounds, to wit, the Ocean, the rivers Ister and Euphrates limits set by nature, to the end it might be a State Adamantine, ( for so Au∣gustus himselfe speaketh in Iulian,) that is, invincible; and lest, as a ship of exceeding great bulke, it might not possibly bee well governed and managed, but endangered through the owne unweldy hugenesse sinke anone, and fall downe at once, which usu∣ally befalleth unto over-great States: or, as Strabo is of opinion, he despised it, see∣ing neither any cause at all of feare, nor hope of much profit from the Britans; and yet it seemed, that no small dammage would be presented from other nations, lying round about the said Island. But what cause so ever it was, certes, after Iulius, and the edge of Romane armes turned upon the Common-wealth it selfe, Britaine was a long time forgotten, even in time of peace. Neverthelesse at last Augustus departed from Rome, with a purpose to transferre the warre into Britaine: At which verie time Iso∣ratius framed this kinde of prayer unto the Goddesse Fortune at Antium. Serves iturum Caesarem in ultimos Orbis Britannos. Save Caesar now that readie is, a journey long to take, Against the Britans most remote, a conquest there to make. But after he was come into Gaule, the Britans sent Embassadors unto him to crave peace: and verily the British Princes and Potentates, having by Embassages and du∣tifull services obtained his amity, dedicated presents and oblations in the Capitol: and brought the whole Iland in a manner to be familiar unto the Romanes, and as it were their owne: Strabo. so as they could endure taxes and imposts, which now are nothing grievous unto them, raised out of such merchandise and commodities as are shipped to and from out of Gaule and Britannie: and those be Ivory workes; Bits and bridles, chaines and wreathes, Electrina. vessels of the mettall A pale an whitish gol Electrum and of glasse, with other base and common wares of like sort. And therefore there needes no garrison for that Iland. For it would require one Legion at the least, and some horsemen, if tributes were to be levied from thence: and the said tributes would but countervaile the charges of main∣taining a garrison there: for of necessity by imposing a tribute, the revenewes comming by tollage and poundage and such like imposts, would be lesse: and if any violent course were used, some perill or other must be looked for. The yeare following likewise, Augustus intended a second expedition into Britain, because there was some variance about the Cove∣nants: but by occasion of some insurrection made in Spaine by the Cantabri and o∣thers, that journey was staied. Neither hath any man reason to beleeve Landinus, or Servius, or Philargyrus, who have recorded that Augustus triumph over the Bri∣tans, and that out of these verses of Maro. Et duo rapta manu diverso ex hoste trophaea, Bis{que} triumphatas utro{que} a littore gentes. And trophees twaine caught by strong hand from divers enemies hoasts, And nations twice triumphed of likewise from both the Of East a West. coasts. Surely, in regard of that surrendry of the Britans, Horace wrote thus; Coelo tonantem credimus Iovem Regnare: Presens Divus habebitur Augustus, adjectis Britannis Imperio, gravibus{que} Persis. We thought before, that Iupiter in heaven above doth raigne For thundring there: but now shall be on earth Augustus here Reputed God, because he did to Romanes Empire gaine Both Britans and fierce Persians, of whom they stood in feare. Tiberius nothing transported with an inordinate desire of extending the Empire, Tiberius. seemeth to have rested in that Counsell of Augustus; For hee brought out a booke written with Augustus his owne hand, wherein was contained the whole wealth and estate of the common-weale, what number as well of Romane Citizens as Allies were in armes, how many Navies, Kingdomes and Provinces, what tributes and imposts [belonged to the state] with a resolution annexed thereto of containing the Empire within the bounds. Which advise and resolution of Augustus contented him so well, as Tacitus reporteth, that he would attempt nothing in Britaine, nor maintaine any garrison or deputies there. For whereas Tacitus reckoneth up the number of Legions, and what coasts or countries they defended at that time, he maketh no mention at all of Britain. And yet it seemeth that the Britans entertained amity with the Romans. For when as at the same time Germanicas sailed the Ocean, some of his company by force of tempest driven to this Iland, were by the Princes thereof sent backe againe. C. Caligula. That Caius Caesar cast in his mind to enter this Iland, it is certaine: but that by his shittle braine, sudden repentance, and wonderfull attempts against Germany, it came to nothing. For to the end that he might terrifie Britain and Germany (over which he hovered) with the fame of some mighty piece of worke, Suetonius in Caligula, he made a bridge be∣tween Baie and the Piles of Puteoli, three miles, and 600. paces in length. But having atchieved no greater exploit, Adminius. than taken to his mercy Adminius the sonne of Cinobelli∣nus King of the Britans, who being by his father banished had fled over sea with a small power and traine about him, he sent magnificent and glorious letters to Rome, as if the whole Ile had beene yielded up into his hands: warning and wishing the posts ever and a∣non, to ride forward in their wagon, directly into the market place and the Curia: and in no wise to deliver the said missives unto the Consuls, but in the temple of Mars, and that in a frequent assembly of the Senate. After this to the Ocean be marcheth, as if he minded to translate the warre over into Bri∣taine: Where even upon the very shore he embattelled his souldiers: himselfe tooke sea in a Galley, and after he had lanched out a little way from the land, returned again (and then moun∣ting up an high pulpit, sate him downe, gave his souldiers the signall of battell, and commanded the trumpets to sound: and so on a sudden charged them to gather cockles, mu kles, and o∣ther small shell fishes, Having gotten these spoiles (as one indeed wanting enemies spoiles for to adorne a Trophye) he waxed proud as if he had conquered the Ocean: and having rewarded his souldiers, Dio. he brought some of those cockles, and the other shell fish to Rome, that there also he might shew the bootie which he had gotten. In token and memoriall of this brave victory he raised an high turret, out of which, as from a watch-tower, there might blaze all night long, lights and fires for the better direction of ships at sea in their course. The ruines whereof are sometimes seene at a low water in the shore of Holland, and by the peo∣ple there inhabiting is called Britenhuis. Who also finde oftentimes stones engraven with letters: of which one had these Characters, C. C. P. F. which they (I wote not how truly) expound thus Caius Caligula Pharum Fecit, that is, Caius Caligula this Watch∣tower. Pharus made. But of this watch-tower more at large, I will write in my discourse of British Islands. Claudius. Afterwards, the inland parts of Britaine, wasted rather with Civill warres and facti∣ons, than by the force of the Romans, after sundry overthrowes and slaughters of both sides, came at the length by little and little under the subjection of the Romans. For, while the States fought severally one by one, they were all vanquished: running so one upon anothers destruction, that untill they fell to utter confusion, they had not in grosse, a feeling of the particular losses that each one sustained. And thus farre forth also wrought ambition in them, that many became false and disloiall, yea, and some fled from their countrey-men, making choise of the Romans protection, swea∣ring alleageance unto them, and practising by all meanes to subject their native coun∣trey, unto their government. Bericus. Among whom the principall was one Bericus, who mo∣ved and perswaded Claudius the Emperour, to give the attempt upon Britaine, which none assaied to doe since the time of Iulius Caesar, and which then was up in a broile and commotion, for that the said Fugitives were not rendred againe unto them. Where∣upon he commanded Aulus Plautius, A. Plautius. at that time Praetor, to goe with an Army into Bri∣taine: who had much adoe to withdraw the said army out of Gaule, Dio. as being much discon∣tented to make warre without the compasse of the world, and therefore drawing out the time in length with many delaies. But when A freed servant of Claudius. Narcissus sent from Claudius, began to mount up into the Tribunall of Plautius, and to make a speech unto the host the souldiers more in∣censed with indignation streightwaies cried all at once, Io. Saturnalia (for the manner is of Slaves, during the Saturnalia, to celebrate that festivall time in the habit of their Ma∣sters) and so presently with willing hearts followed Plautius. The forces being divided in∣to three parts, for feare lest if they arrived all in one place, they might be put by their lan∣ding; carried backe by a gale of wind, found some trouble in their passage: yet taking heart againe, because as they sailed along, there was seene a fire-drake in the Element shooting from the East the West, they were conveied over into the Island, and no man stopped them. For the Britans supposing verily, in regard of those things which I have related, that they would not come, had not assembled themselves: and therefore without any conflict, they lay hidden within bogs, marishes, and woods, in hope by lingring delaies to wearie the Romans, that they should be forced without any service exploited to retire hence, like as it had befallen unto Iulius Caesar. Wherefore, Plautius tooke great paines in seeking of them out. After he had found them (now they were not free States, but ruled under divers Kings) first he discomfited Caractacus, afterward Togodumnus, the sonnes of Cunobellinus, for their father was deceased. When these were fled, part of the Othorwise to Duobuni, Glocester∣shire, and O fordshire. Bodunni, who were subject to the Or Caticu¦ lani, that is, Buckingham shire, and Hartford∣shire. Catuellani, he received into his protection: and having left a garrison there, hee went for∣ward to a certaine river: but because the Britans thought the Romans could not possibly passe over without a bridge, they lay encamped more carelesly on the farther side thereof. Plau∣tius therefore, set the Germanes, who were wont to wade through the most swift and vio∣lent rivers, even in their very armour. These comming upon the enemies at unawares, hurt not a man of them, but wounded the horses onely that drew their chariots, who when they were troubled and disordered, the men were not able to sit them. Then sent hee Flavus Vespasianus, (who afterwards became Emperour) and his brother Sabinus with him as Lieutenant, who likewise having passed over the river, surprised very many of the Barba∣rians, and slew them. Neither fled the rest away, but the morrow after joyned battell, where∣in the victorie remained doubtfull: untill such time as C. Sidius Geta, at the very point to have beene taken prisoner by the enemies, vanquished them so, as that for his good service, triumphall honours were granted unto him, although he had not been Consull. From thence the Barbarians retired themselves to the river Thames, where it dischargeth it selfe into the sea, and with the flowe thereof riseth high. This river they soone passed over, as being skilfull of such places as would affoord them firme footing, and were passable fords. And the Romans in pursuing them were in dan∣ger. Soone after, when the Germanes had swum over a second time whiles some of them, passed over at a bridge, higher up the river, environing the Barbarians on every side, they made a great slaughter of them: but when unadvisedly they followed after the rest, they fell upon blind bogs and lost many of their men. Hereupon, and for that the Britans by occasi∣on of Togodumnus his death abated not their courage one whit, but rather prepared them∣selves to fight the more fiercely in revenge of his death, Plautius for feare went no far∣ther: but setting a guard to keep what he had gotten, sent for Claudius, having a warrant and commandement so to doe, in case he were overlaid with any extraordinary violence, For which expedition among much other Equipage, Elephants. Elephants also were gotten together and prepared. Claudius advertised of these newes, committed the affaires of the City, and the souldiers likewise to the charge of Vitellius (upon whom, as also upon himselfe, he had conferred a Consulship for six moneths). Then went he downe in person by water from Rome to Ostra, and so from thence sailed to Marshils: and travelling the rest of the way partly by land and partly by sea came to the Ocean, embarked, crossed the channell into Britaine, and went directly forward to his forces expecting him by the Thames side. When he had re∣ceived them into his owne charge, and passed over the river, he fought a set battell with the Barbarians, assembled against his comming, and obtained victory. Then tooke he in Now Ma¦don. Ca∣malodunum the roiall seat of Cunobellinus, and many thence he drave, others upon their yeelding he tooke to mercy. For these acts performed, divers times he was stiled Imperator, a thing directly against the Romanes custome; for, lawfull it is not in one war to assume that name oftner than once. Furthermore, Claudius disarmed the Britans, and committed as well them to be governed, as the rest to be subdued, unto Plautius. Himselfe made speede to Rome, sending before him Pompeius and Silanus his That had married his daughters. sonnes in Law, with tidings of this victorie, Thus much Dio. Howbeit Suetonius reporteth, that part of the Iland he tooke into his hands upon submission without any battell or bloodshed. Sixteene daies or thereabout himselfe stayed in Britain: in which time he remitted unto the Gentry and Nobility of the Britans the confiscation of their goods: For which benefit of his, they frequented his temple and adored him as a God. Thus returned he to Rome, in the sixt moneth after that he went forth from thence. So great a matter it was and of such consequence to have conquered even so small a parcell of Britain, that the Senate thereupon decreed in the honor of Claudius, year∣ly Games, triumphall Arches both in Rome and also at Bologne. Gessoriacum in Gaul, and a most honorable and stately triumph: to the beholding whereof the governors of Pro∣vinces also, yea and certaine banished persons were permitted to come into Rome: a Navall coronet was fixed upon the looure of the Palace, Plinie. as it were the ensigne of the British sea subdued by him: the Provinces brought in Crownes of gold, and France. Gallia Comata one above the rest, waighing 9. pounds: and the hither part of Spaine ano∣ther of 7. pound weight. He mounted up into the Capitoll by the staires on his knees, supported and heaued up by his sonnes in Law on either side. He entred in triumph∣ing wise the venice Gulfe. Adriaticke sea, embarqued in a vessell more like to some exceeding great house than a ship. Unto his wife Messalina was allowed by the Senate the highest place to sit in, as also to ride in a Carroch, or hanging coach. After this, he set forth triumphall plaies and games, having taken upon him for that purpose the Consular office and authoritie. The solemnities were exhibited at once in two The∣atres, and many times when hee was gone aside from the sight, others had the charge thereof. Horse runnings for the prize hee promised as many as those daies would admit: Howbeit above ten there were not: for betweene every course of hor∣ses, Beares were killed, champions performed their devoirs, and choyce boies sent for out of Asia danced the warlike dance in armor. Moreover, upon Valerius Asiaticus, Julius Silanus, Sidius Geta, and others, in regard of this conquest, hee heaped Trium∣phall ornaments. He suffered Licinius Crassus Frugi to follow after himselfe in this triumph, mounted upon a trapped courser with a rich caparison, and arraied in a roabe of Date tree worke. Upon Posidius the Eunuch hee bestowed a speare staffe without an head: upon C. Gavius, cheines, bracelets, horse trappings, and a coronet of gold, as is to be seene in an ancient marble at Taurinum. In the meane time Aulus Plautius went on with the reliques of this war, and sped so well in his battels, that Claudius passed a decree, that he should ride in pety tri∣umph ovant: and when he was entred into the City, himselfe went to meet him, gi∣ving him the right hand all the way both going and comming. Vespasian. And Vespasian even then shewed by the destinies, whom Claudius assumed unto him to beare a part of this British war, partly under the conduct of Claudius himselfe, and partly of Plauti∣us, fought thirty battels with the enemy: two most mighty nations, and above twen∣ty townes together, with the Isle of Vectem. Sueton. in Ve∣spasian. cap. 4. Wight he subdued. For which worthy exploits, he received triumphall ornaments, and within a short space two sacerdotall dignities, with a Consulship beside which hee bare the two last moneths of the yeare. Titus also served here in quality of a Tribune under his father, with exceeding commen∣dation for his industry and valour, (for valiantly he delivered his father when he was besieged): and no lesse report of his modest carriage: as appeareth by a number of his Images and titles to them annexed, thorowout the Provinces of Germanie and Britaine. The rest of the Occurrences which hapned in Britaine afterward unto the very latter end of Domitian, Sueton. in Tit. cap. 4. Tacitus, who best can do it, will declare by his owne words to this effect. P. Ostorius Propraetor. P. Ostorius Propraetor in Britan was welcomed at his first landing with troubles and tumults. The enemies ranged all over the Allies country, and used so much the greater violence, for that they thought the new captaine was unacquainted with the army, (the win∣ter also being now began) would not come foorth to encounter. But he knowing well that the first successes alwaies breed either feare or confidence, gathered with all speed his readiest co∣horts, advanced toward the enemy; and having slaine those which made head against him, pursued the rest that were dispersed for feare they should joine againe: and lest an hatefull and faithlesse peace might give neither captaine nor souldier any rest, he went about to disarme as many of them as he suspected, and by raising forts and setting garrisons upon the two rivers The Nem at North∣hampton. Aufona and the Sabrina. Iceni. Severn to restrain and hem in the Britons. Which the Iceni first of all re∣fused, a strong nation and unshaken with battels, Autonas, or Aufonas. because of their owne motion they had sought our alliance and amity. And at their instigation, the people adjoyning chose a place to fight in, compassed about with a rude and rusticall rampire, having a narrow entrance of purpose to hinder the comming in of horsemen. This fense the Romane captaine, albeit he had un∣der his conduct the power of his allies, alone without the maine forces of the Legion assaieth to breake thorow: And having bestowed his cohorts in rankes setteth the troupes of horse∣men in like readinesse to performe their service. Then after the signall given, they broke o∣pen the said rampire, and disordered the enemies encombred and penned within their owne hold. And they knowing in their owne conscience they were no better than rebels, and see∣ing all passages for escape stopped up, shewed great valour and courage in defending themsel∣ves. In which fight M. Ostorius the lieutenants sonne deserved the honor of saving a Citi∣zen. Vpon the discomfiture and slaughter of these Iceni, they that wavered betweene warre and peace became setled and were quiet: and so the army was led against the Cangi. Cheshire as some thi Cangi. Whose ter∣ritory they wasted, harried and spoiled all over: whiles the enemies durst not shew themselves in the field, or if privily by stealth they attempted to cut off the taile of our armie as they mar∣ched, they paid for their craft and deceit. Brigantes. Yorkshire. Lancashire Bishoprick Durham, Westmorla Cumberla Now by this time were the Romanes come well neere to the sea coast that looketh toward Ireland, when certaine troubles and discords sprung up among the the Brigantes, brought their leader backe, being certainly resolved to attempt no new matters, before he had setled the old. But as for the Brigantes, some few being put to death that began first to take armes, he pardoned the residue, and all were quieted. The Southwa as Herefor shire, Rad∣norshire, Brecknock¦shire, Mon¦mouthshir and Glam¦ganshire. Camalod ¦num a col nie. Silures could neither by cruelty nor faire meanes bee reclaimed but they would needs war; and therefore no remedy there was but to keepe them under with garrisons of Legionary souldiers. Which to performe more easily, the colonie called Camalodunum consisting of a strong compa∣ny of old souldiers was brought into the countries by conquest subdued, for succour and save∣gard against Rebels, and an inducement to traine the Associats to observe the lawes. Certaine Cities and States were granted by way of Donation to King Cogidunus, according to the an∣cient custome of the people of Rome, that they might have even Kings to be instruments of ser∣vitude and thraldome. Then went the Romanes from thence against the Silures, who besides their owne stoutnesse trusted much in the strength of Caractacus, Caratacus. a man whom many dangerous adventures which he had waded thorow, and as many prosperous exploits by him atchieved, had so lifted up, that he carried the reputation and praeheminence above all the British Commanders. But he in subtill craft, and knowledge of the deceitfull waies, having the advantage of us, though other∣wise weaker in strength of souldiers, translateth the warre into the country of the Ordovice Northwa as Montg¦meryshire Merionet¦shire, Ca vanshire, Denbigh∣shire, and Flintshire Ordovices: and there, joyning to him as many as feared our peace, resolveth to hazard the last chance, ha∣ving chosen a place for the battell, where the comming in, and going forth, with all things else might be incommodious to us, but for his very advantageous. Then, against the high hilles, and wheresoever there was any easie passage, & gentle accesse, he stopped up the way with heaps of stones raised in manner of a rampier: withall, there ranne hard by a river having a doubt∣ful foord, and the severall companies of his Majoru nationum is, of Na ons or best souldiers had taken their standing before the fortifications. Besides all this, the leaders of every nation went about, exhorted and encouraged their men, by making lesse all causes of feare, and kindling in them good conceits of hope, with all other motives and inducements to war. And verily Caractacus bestirring himself, and cour∣sing from place to place, Majoru Nationum the Nati protested, That this was the day, this the battell, which should begin either the recovery of their libertie for ever, or else perpetuall bondage. And here, he called up∣on his ancestors by name, who had chased Caesar the Dictator from hence, through whose va∣lour they were freed from the Romane axes, and tributes, and enjoyed still the bodies of their wives, ann children undefiled. As he uttered these and such like speeches, the generall multitude of the souldiers made a noise about him, and bound themselves by oath every one ac∣cording to the religion of his countrey, that they would not give way and yeeld; for any weapons or wounds whatsoever. This couragious and cheerefull alacritie of theirs, astonied the Romane captaine, considering the river just before his face, the rampier beside which they had cast up, the high hils over their heads, nothing but terrible, and full of defendants, put him into a won∣drous fright. Neverthelesse the souldiers called hard for battell, crying still, that there was no∣thing which valour could not overcome. The Praefects and Tribunes also with like words, much enforced the ardour and courage of the whole armie. Then Ostorius having viewed round about what places were unpassable, and what yeelded passage, advanceth forward his men in boiling heat of choler, and easily wadeth over the river. Being come to the banke and rampier aforesaid, so long as the volley of darts continued on both sides, our men received more wounds, and in greater number were slaine. But after that by making of a targnet roofe of fence, those rude and ill fashioned joynts of stones were plucked a sunder, and the fronts of both armies came close to hand-strokes, without ods; the Barbarians fled to the hill tops. But thither also, as well the heavie corselets, as the light armed souldiers brake in: whiles these shot their darts and javelins at them, the other preassed thicke and close together upon them: Contrariwise the Bri∣tans rankes were broken and disordered, as who had neither head peece nor coat of fence. If they thought to resist our auxiliarie forces, they were beaten downe with the arming swords & massie pikes of the Legionarie souldiers: if they turned to make head against them, they were slaine with the Speares, and bastard swords of the auxiliaries. A noble and renowned victo∣rie this was. The wife and daughter both of Caractacus, were taken prisoners, his brethren also yeelded themselves. Himselfe, as generally there is no trusting to succour in adversitie, craving defence and protection of Cartismandua Queene of the Brigantes, was by her taken, bound with yrons, and delivered to the Conquerours, nine yeeres after the warre began in Bri∣taine. Whereupon the fame of him being carried over into the Islands, and spread abrode tho∣rowout the Provinces adjoyning, was famous also in Italie: in so much as they desired to see who he was that so many yeeres had defied and contemned our forces. Neither was the name of Caractacus meanly esteemed of at Rome. And Caesar whiles he extolled his one worth and ho∣nour, made the conquered Prince more glorious. For why, the people also was assembled and cal∣led, as to see a notable spectacle. The cohorts of the Emperours guard stood all armed in good order within an open plaine lying before their campe. Then as King Caractacus his vassals and dependants marched before, the caparisons, chaines, and whatsoever he had wonne in wars a∣gainst strangers, were brought in a shew: then, his brethren, wife and daughter: and last of all himselfe was shewed to the people. The prayers of all the rest were by reason of feare, base, and nothing savouring of nobilitie: but Caractacus, neither hanging downe his head, nor with words craving any mercy, when he stood before the Emperours tribunall, spake in this wise. If my moderation in prosperity had beene as great as my nobility and fortune was, I had come rather as a friend into this City, than a Captive: neither would you have disdained to receive me with covenants of peace, being a Prince descended of Noble Progenitors, and a commander over many nations. My present state, as it is to me dishonorable, so to you it is magnificent. I have had horses, men, armour and wealth: what marvell if against my will I have forgone them all? For if yee will be rulers over all men, it followeth that all men must abide servitude. If presently I had yeelded and been delivered into your hands; neither had my fortune nor your glorie been renowned: and oblivion would have follow∣ed my punishment. But if you save me alive, I shall be an example of your clemencie for e∣ver. Vpon these words Caesar pardoned him, his wife and brethren. And they being allun∣bound, did their reverence likewise unto Agrippina, What be∣came of his daughters, Tacitus? (who sat a loft not far off in another high seat to be seene) giving her the like praises and in the same degrees of stile as they did the Emperor himselfe. Surely a strange and unexampled precedent among all our an∣cestors, that a woman should sit and command the Romane ensignes. But shee carried her selfe as a fellow and associate in the Empire, gotten by her progenitors. After this, the Lords of the Senate were called together, who made long and glorious discourses as touching the captivity of Caractacus. Neither was this, as they affirmed, lesse honorable, than when Pub. Scipio shewed Siphax: Luc. Paulus Perses, or whosoever else exhibited, conquered Kings unto the people. As for Ostorius, decreed it was hee should be honoured with triumphall ornaments. These conquests of Britain, writers have numbred among the most famous mo∣numents and testimonies of the Romans prowesse. And thereupon Seneca writeth thus; Claudius might make his boast that he first vanquished the Britans: for Iulius Caesar did but shew them only to the Romans. And in another place, writing of the same Claudius, Ille Britannos Vltra noti Littora Ponti, Et caeruleos Scuta Brigantes, Dare Romuleis Colla catenis Iussit, & ipsum Nova Romanae Iura securis Tremere Oceanum. The Britans, those, that seated are beyond the knowne sea-coast, And Brigants with blew-painted shields, he forced with his hoast, To yeeld their necks in Romane chaines as captive to be led, And even the Ocean this new power of Romane axe to dread. And Seneca the Tragicke poet in his Octavia, versified in this manner concerning Claudius, Cui{que} Britanni Terga dedere, ducibus nostris Antè ignoti juris{que} sui. And unto whom the Britans shew'd their backs, who er'st unknowne To all our Captaines liv'd by lawes and customs of their owne. And in the same tragedie, for that he had passed over the Thames, En qui orae Tamisis primus posuit jugum Ignota tantis classibus texit freta: Interque gentes barbaras tutus fuit, Et soeva maria; conjugis scelere—Occidit. Behold, who first the mouth and coast of Thamis, did subdew And spread with mightie fleets those Firths, the like that never never knew: With nations rude, in raging seas, who lived safe and sound, By wicked hand of cursed wife his death at home he found. Semblably Egesippus, saith thus of Claudius, Witnesse here is Britaine, which li∣ing without the world, is by the might of Romans reduced into the world. Whom the former age knew not, the Romans victory hath discovered: and even they now are become servants, who knew not what servitude was: being born only for themselves, and alwaies free unto them∣selves: even they who being by the interflow of the sea divided frō the power of their superiors, could not stand in feare of them whom they knew not. A greater matter therfore it was, to have passed over to the Britans, than to have triumphed over the Britans. And in another place, Bri∣taine also, which lieth hid amidst the waves, he gained to the Roman Empire by force of armes: by the triumph over which Island, Rome was thought to be more welthy, Claudius reputed more wary and politick, and Nero esteemed more fortunate. Also in another passage, which deserveth most of all to be put downe here, The very Elements also, have done homage to the name of the Romans: to whom likewise even the round world hath sworne alleageance already, which is enclosed and bounded with the Romane Empire: and in one word is of many called the RO∣MANE WORLD. For if we search into the truth, the whole army it selfe is comprised with∣in the Empire of the Romans: upon which the Roman valour, having gone forward still be∣yond the Ocean, hath sought for it selfe another world, and in Britaine an Island remote from the confines of Lands hath found out for a selfe another possession. To conclude, they who are denied the benefit, not onely of the free burgesie of Rome, but in manner also of all converse with men, are directed and awarded thither, there to dwell as persons banished out of the world. The Ocean now hath reined up his bounds: For the Romans know how to seeke into his inward secret parts. And Iosephus in the person of Titus, speaketh thus to the Iewes: What grea∣ter wall and barre than the Ocean? wherewith the Britans being fensed and inclosed, doe yet adore the Romans forces. Moreover, as touching this argument, that renowned Ioseph Scaliger, in his Ca∣talects, hath saved and freed from rust and mouldinesse certaine verses of a most learned Poet though unknown: which, because they are not every where to bee found, I will not thinke much of my paints to put down: for they are as good as good may be. Now, that they be sundry Epigrams, and therefore distinctly to be considered, Iohn Obsopaeus the German, a passing learned young man, hath out of ancient (manuscripts) parchments very lately, Antonius Del∣rio readeth o∣therwise in some places: the divers readings therefore, I have here set to. enformed me: Ausonius nunquam tellus violata triumphis. Ictatuo, Caesar, fulmine procubuit. Oceanus{que} tuas ultra se Prospicit, that is, seeth before him. respicit a as, Qui finis mundo est Nunc, now. Or before, non erit imperio. That Land whose honour never felt, by Roman triumph, wrong By dint la e of thy thunder-bolt, ô Caesar, lay along: The Ocean seeth prospicit if respicit, be∣hinde. beyond it selfe thine altars, to adore, Non. if Nun , reade thus. That, will That will be now thine Empires bound, which was of world before. not bound their Empire, now, which did the world before. Victa priús nulli, jam jam spectata triumph , Illibata tuos gens jacet in titulos. Fabula visa diù, medio{que} reconditaponto Libera victori jam modó colla dedit. Euphrates Ortus, Rhenus recluserat. incluserit Arctos; Oceanus medium venit in imperium. A people erst untouch'd, unfoil'd, and conquered of none, Late seene in triumph, to thy stile hath title added one: Though but a tale long time, as hid in mid-sea past all view, To Victors yoke now yeelded necke, that never bondage knew. How ever Rhene shuts up the North, Euphrates Easterne land, It skils not, now that th' Ocean sea is whole at thy command. Libera non hostem, non passa Britannia Regem, Aeternum nostro quae procul orbe jacet; Foelix adversis, & sorte oppressa secunda Communis nobis, & tibi, Caesar, erit. Britaine most free, which enemie and Monarch never felt, Far dissite from this world of ours, wherein we ever dwelt; An happie state in adverse times, but wonne in prosperous dayes, Sall be, ô Caesar, common now to thee and us alwaies. Ultima cingebat Tibris tua, Romule, Regna: Hic tibi finis erat, religiose Numa. Et tua, Dive, tuum sacrata potentia coelo Extremum citra constitit Oceanum. At nunc Oceanus geminos interluit orbes Pars est imperij, terminus ante fuit, Thy Kingdomes all, ô Romulus, Tibris sometime did bound Past it, ô Numa prince devout, thou had'st no foot of ground: And even thy power right sacred now, and heavenly though it be, O Caesar, staied within precinct of thine owne Ocean sea: But now the Ocean interflow s two worlds, by double shore, And parcell of our Empire is, which was the bound before. Mars pater, & nostrae gèntis tutela Quirine, Et magno positus Caesar uter{que} Polo. Cernitis ignotos Latia sub lege Britannos, Sol citra nostrum flectitur imperium. Vltima cesserunt adaperto claustra Profundo Et jam Romano Cingitur. cingimur Oceano. O father Mars ô Romulus, Protector of our race, And Caesars both, late defied, in heav'n who have your place. The Britans erst unknown, ye see the Latian lawes embrace And short of our large Seignory the Sun turnes in his race. The furthest frontiers soone gave way, when seas once opened were The Romane Ocean now it is, wherein enclosed we are. Opponis frustrà rapidum Germania Rhenum, Euphrates prodest nil tibi, Parthe fugax. Oceanus jam terga dedit, nec pervius ulli Caesareos fasces, imperium{que} tulit. In vaine opposest thou for fence, swift Rhene, ô Germany Euphrates (Parthian) boots thee nought, thou that in fight dost flie. For th' Ocean is already fled, which passable to none Hath now the Caesars government, and Romes rule undergone. Illa procul nostro semota, exclusa{que} coelo, Semoto. Alluitur nostrâ victa Britannia aquá, Semota, & vasto disjuncta Britannia Ponto Cincta{que} inaccessis horrida littoribus: Quam fallax aestu circuit Oceanus. Quam fallax aestu circuit Oceanus. Brumalem sortita Polum. plagam: quà frigida semper Praefulget stellis Arctos in occiduis. Conspectu{que} tuo devicta Britannia, Caesar, Subdidit insueto colla premenda jugo Aspice, confundit populos imper via tellus, Conjunctum, est quod adhuc orbis, & orbis erat, That Britain from our clime far set and thence excluded quite, Conquerd of late is washed yet, with water ours by right. Britain, I say, far set apart, and by vast sea disjoin'd, Wall'd with inaccessible banks and craggy clifts behind; Which father Nereus fensed had with billowes most invincible And Ocean likewise compassed with ebs and flowes as fallible. Britain that hath a wintry clime alotted for her seat, Where cold North-Beare shines alway bright with stars that never set Even at thy sight and first approach ô Caesar soone subdu'd, Submitted hath her necke to beare strange yoke of servitude. Behold, the earth unpassable of nations makes commixtion, What heretofore was world and world is now conjoined in one. Now let Tacitus proceed in his Story. Vntill this time all went well with Ostorius: but soone after, his fortune stood in dolefull termes: either for that upon the displacing of Ca∣ractacus as if thereby all had beene subdued and the warre ended, the Romans intended not so carefully their militarie service: or because the enemies in compassion of so puissant a king, were more fervently enflamed to revenge. For they environed the Camp-master and those Legionary cohorts which were left behind to build fortresses in the Silures country: And if the villages ans forts next adjoyning had not speedily come to rescue, they had beene put to the sword every man. Neverthelesse the Camp-Master, with eight Centurions and all the forwardest maniples of common souldiers were slaine; and not long after, they put to flight our forragers, and the very troupes of horsemen that were sent out to succour them. Then Ostorius setteth out certaine companies lightly appointed, and yet thereby could not stay their flight, had not the Legions come in and undertooke the battell. By their strength they fought with small ods on either hand, but afterward wee had the better of it, and the enemie betooke himselfe to his heeles and escaped with small losse, because the day was farre spent. After this, they had many skirmishes, and for the most part in manner of rodes and robbe∣ries; in woods, on marishes, rashly or with foresight it skilled not: according as it fell out, either as occasion by chance, or their owne hearts served them: one while for anger, another while for booty: sometime by commandement from their Captaines, and sometimes againe without their warrant and privitie: but principally through the wilfull obstinacie of the Silures, who were exasperated with a speech of the Roman Generalls, that was bruted abroad and came to their eares: which was this, That as the Sugambri were rooted out and transpor∣ted over into Gaul, so the name of the Silures should utterly be extinguished. And in this heat they intercepted two auxiliary bands, as they through the avarice of their Praefects for∣raied and spoiled without advised circumspection. Also by large giving away of spoiles and prisoners, they drew the rest of the Nations to revolt. And then Ostorius wearied with care and griefe of heart yielded up his vitall breath. Whereat the enemies rejoyced, as at the death of a Captaine not to be despised, who though he died not in battell, yet was toiled out and spent by reason of the warres. A. Didius A∣vitus Gallus Propretor. But Caesar having intelligence of his Lieutenants death, lest the Province should bee de∣stitute of a governour, appointed A. Didius in his place. He beeing thither come with great speed, yet found not all in good state. For in the meane space, the Legion whereof Manlius Valens had the charge, met with an unlucky and disasterous fight. The fame whereof the enemies had made greater than it was, to terrifie the captaine which was comming: who al∣so in the like policie multiplied all that he heard, to win more praise by appeasing those trou∣bles, or to purchase pardon more easily, if they continued still. The Silures were they that wrought us this displeasure and damage, whereupon they overran the province far and nere, untill such time as by Didius his comming they were driven backe. About this time Claudius departed this life: and Nero succeeded him in the Empire, one who had no heart at all to attempt any thing in warfare: Nero. nay he was minded once to with∣draw the forces out of Britain: Neither gave he over that intent of his but onely for shame, lest he might have been thought to deprave the glory of Claudius. After that Caracta∣cus was taken, Venutius. Venutius a very expert man above the rest in military affaires, borne under the state of the Or haply, Brigantes. Iugantes, long time trusty to us, and defended by the Romanes power, ha∣ving to wife Queene Cartismandua, by occasion soone after of a divorce, and then of open war between them, rebelled also against us, and proceeded to plaine hostility. At the first, the quarrell was onely between them two: untill Cartismandua by pollicie and craft had in∣tercepted the brother, and neere kinsmen of Venutius. Whereupon our enemies, kindled with rage, and pricked forward with an ignominous indignity, lest they should be brought under the yoke of a womans government, with a strong power of choise youth, by force of armes invaded her kingdome, which was foreseen by us: and thereupon were cohorts sent to aid her, and they fought a hot battell: The beginning whereof was doubtfull, but the end more joifull. The Legion also which Cesius Nasica commanded, fought with like successe. For, Didius [yee must thinke] being strucken in yeeres, and having many honours heaped upon him, thought it sufficient to execute his charge and keep off the enemy by the ministe∣ry of others. For what was woon by others he held: onely a few fortresses he built forward farther into the country: whereby he might purchase the name of enlarging his office. These exploits although they were atchieved by two Propraetors Ostorius and Didius in many years, yet I thought good to joyne together, lest beeing severed, they should not so well have beene remembred. After Didius Avicus, Verannius Propretor. there succeeded Verannius, who having with small rodes spoiled the Silures, was hindered by death, for warring any farther: a man while he lived carrying a great name of precise severitie, but in his last will he shewed himselfe manifestly ambiti∣ous. For after much flattering of Nero, he added this, That he would have subdued the Pro∣vince unto his obedience, if he had lived the next two yeares. But then Suetonius Paulinus governed the Britans, Paulus Sue∣tonius Pro∣pretor. one in martiall skill, and opinion of the people (which suffereth no man without a concurrent) striving to match Corbule; de∣sirous to equall the honour which he won in recovering Armenia, by subduing the enemies that stood out in this country. And therefore hee maketh all the preparation hee can to in∣vade the Isle of Anglesey. Mona, peopled with strong Inhabitants, and a receptacle of traiterous fu∣gitives. To this purpose hee buildeth flat botom vessels, for the shalowes and uncertaine landing places. Thus the footmen passed over: and then followed the horsemen by the foord, or if the waters were any thing high, by swimming they put the horses over. Against them the enemies stood upon the shore in divers places embattelled thicke in array, well appointed with men and weapons; with women also running among: who all in blacke and mourne∣full array, with their haire about their eares, carried firebrands before them in their hands like the Furies of hell. Druidae. The Druidae likewise round about them, lifting up their hands to hea∣ven, and pouring out deadly and cursing praiers, with this so strange and unco th sight, amazed the souldiers so, as they stood still as stockes and stirred not a foot, as if they would expose their bodies to receive all wounds presented unto them. But afterwards, be∣ing encouraged by their Captaine, and animating one another, that they should not feare a flocke of women and franticke people, they displaied their ensignes and advanced forward. Downe they went with such as encountred them and thrust them within their owne fires. This done they planted garrisons in their townes, and cut downe their woods and groves con∣secrated to their execrable superstitions. Vicis alias victis, that is over the van∣quished. For they accounted it lawfull, to offer sacrifies up∣on their altars with the bloud of captives, and to aske counsell of their Gods by inspection of mens fibres and entrailes. As Suetonius was busie in these actions, newes came unto him that the Province was suddenly revolted. Prasutagus. Prasutagus King of the Iceni, in wealth surpassing all others, had set down in his will Caesar with two of his daughters to be his heires; supposing by this kind of flattery to curry favour, and to make his kingdome and house most secured from all injuries. Which fell out farre otherwise: in so much as his kingdome by Centurions, his house by slaves were spoiled and reputed lawfull booties. Boodicia, also is name Boaducia Boudicia, V adica, and Bunduica. And to beginne withall, his wife Boadicia was whipped, and his daughters defloured. The chiefest of the Iceni, as if the whole country had beene gi∣ven them by way of gift, are turned out of their ancient inheritances, and the Kings kins∣folke reputed as slaves. By reason of which contumelious indignitie, and for feare of worse, con idering they had beene reduced into the forme of a province, the Britaines began among themselves to cast and thinke upon the miseries of servitude, to lay together their wrongs and oppressions, in ripping of them vp to aggravate them by constructions to the highest, in these tearmes: that no other good was to be looked for by sufferance, but that more grie∣vous burdens should be imposed upon them still, as men ready to beare all willingly. That whereas in times past, their states had but one King a piece, now there were two thrust upon them: the Lieutenant, cruelly to suck their bloud, and the Procuratour as greedy to preie upon that substance: That the variance of these rulers was the torment; and their agree∣ment the undoing of the poore subjects: the one vexing by souldiers and Centurions, the o∣ther by extortions and reprochfull abuses: so that now there was nothing safe from their unsatiable avarice, nothing freed from their unbridled lust. In warre and battell yet, the stronger man commonly is bee that maketh spoile; but now cowards for the most part, and weaklings are they that dispossesse them of their dwelling houses, bereave them of their chil∣dren, enjoyne them to muster, as if they were men that knew not to doe any thing else, save on∣ly to die for their country. For otherwise, what a small handfull thinke yee of souldiers have come over to serve, if the Britaines would fall to reckon themselves? Thus Germany had sha∣ken off the yoke of obedience, and yet were defended by a river only, and not by the Ocean: as for these Romans, what motives have they of warre but their owne covetousnesse, riot, and wanton lust? whereas we have our native country, our wives and children to provoke us thereto. Surely they would retire and bee gone as sometime Iulius, their canonized God, went his waies▪ if wee would endeavour to follow the valour and proësse of our ancestors, and not be dismaied with the doubtfull event of one skirmish or two: and commonly in such as are distressed and in miserie, there is more stomacke to attempt, and greater resolution to continue. And even now the Gods also take pittie of the Britaines poore estate, who keepe the Roman Generall out of the way, and confine the Lieutenant with his hands full in another Island: and themselves being assembled to advise together, had attained to the hardest points of all in an action of that nature, wherein without question it is more dangerous to bee taken consulting, than in the very action. With these and such inducements, inciting and quickning one another, they take armes under the conduct of Boodicia a Ladie of the roiall bloud (for in matter of govern∣ment in chiefe the Britaines make no distinction of sex) having stirred up the Trinobants to Rebellion, and as many as yet, not broken to the yoke of servitude, had in secret conspiracies vowed to recover and resume their libertie, bearing a most bitter hatred against the old soul∣diers. For those who newly brought into the Colonie Camalodunum, The Colony Camalodu∣num, that is, Maldon. thrust the ancient Inhabi∣tants out of their houses, disseized them of their Lands, Livings, calling them captives and slaves, whiles the new souldiers favoured & maintained the insolent outrages of the old, in re∣gard of conformitie in life & hope of like licenciousnesse. Besides, a Temple erected in the ho∣nour of Claudius of sacred memorie, as an Altar of perpetuall dominion over them, was an eie∣sore, & the Priests chosen under colour of religion, wasted & consumed all their wealth. Now, it was not thought any hard piece of work to raze & destroy that Colonie, not fensed with any fortifications: a thing not circumspectly foreseene of our captaines, whiles they had greater care of pleasure, See Viphili∣nus in Nero. than profit. Amid these occurrences, the image of victory set up in the Camalodunum, fell downe without any apparant causes, and turned backward, as if it would give place to the enemies. And certaine women distempered with some fanaticall furie, went singing by way of prophesie, that destruction was at hand. And strange noises abroad were heard into their Coun∣sell house, their Theatre resounded with hideous howlings, and a strange spectre, or apparition was seen in the arme of the sea Haply, the Firth of Fa∣mesa. there, a signe foretelling the subversion of that Colonie. Fur∣thermore, the Ocean bloudy in shew, and the shapes of mens bodies left after an ebbe, as the Britans construed favourably to feed their owne hopes, so the old souldiers interpreted to the increase of their feare. But because Suetonius was far off, they craved help of Catus Derianus the Procurator: who sent unto them not passing two hundred, and those but badly armed: and within the towne the number of souldiers which was not great, trusted to the fence of the Tem∣ple. And by reason that those among them, which being privy to the secret cōspiracie aforesaid, troubled their designments, hindred them, they had neither made trench or rampier before the town, nor sent away their old folke, and women, keeping the lustie young men only, and so be∣ing secure, as it had been in the time of perfect peace, surprized they were at unawares, & en∣closed round about with a multitude of barbarous people. And verily all other things were vi∣olently sacked or consumed with fire: the Temple only excepted, wherein the souldiers had ga∣thered themselves round together, which also was two daies together besieged and so forced. Also, Paetilius Ce∣realis. the Britans it their train of victory, encountring Petelius Cerealis Lieutenant of the ninth Legion, as he was comming with aid, put the legion to flight & slew all the footmen. Ce∣realis himselfe with the Cavallery escaped to the campe, & saved himselfe within the fortifi∣cations. Vpon which overthrow, & in regard of the provinciall peoples hatred, driven through the avarice of the Romans to take armes, Catus the Procurator passed over in great haste for feare, into Gaul. But Suetonius with constant resolution, passing through the midst of his ene∣mies, went to Londinium, a towne verily by the name that it carried of a Colony, nothing fa∣mous, but for concourse of merchants, & London. provision of necessaries most of all other frequented. Being thither come, he stood doubtfull whether to chuse it for the seat of war or no. And con∣sidering well the small number of souldiers that he had, Commea∣tuum. & by good proofs taught how Petilius paid for his rashnesse, he determined with the damage of one towne to save all the rest whole. Neither could he bee won by the weeping and pitifull teares of those that besought his aide, but he would needs put out the signall of a remove, and receive all followers, as part of his armie to march along with him. As many therefore as weaknesse of sex, wearisomnesse of age, or plea∣santnesse of the place held back, were all put to the sword by the enemie. The like calamitie be∣fell unto the free towne Verulam neere to Albans. Verulamium: because the Barbarians leaving the castles & forts of garrison souldiers, made spoile of the richest and fattest: and carrying their pillage into some place of safetie, Militar or milita as men glad of bootie, went on still to such as were of note and mark above the rest. And thus to the number of seventie thousand Roman citizens and associats together, by true report, Deserent tutum, or fendentil tutum, th whiles th fendants stood no with safe upon the guard. were knowne to have been slaine in those places before named. For there was no ta∣king of prisoners, no selling of them, nor any other commerce and traffique of war, but killing, hanging, burning and crucifying, such haste they made to make havocke of all, as if they were to requite the measure they had suffered, and anticipate in the meane while all revenge. Now by this time Suetonius having with him the fourteenth Legion with the old souldiers, of the twentieth, & the auxiliaries from the parts next adjoyning, was well neere ten thousand strong, when he resolved to lay aside all further delaies, and to trie the chance of a main battel. And so he chooseth a place with a narrow entrance like a gullet, Vexillari and enclosed behind with a wood: being well assured, that he had no enemies but in front, and that the plain lay open with∣out feare of ambush The Legionarie souldiers therefore, being marshalled in thick rankes, and close together, with the light armours about them, the horsemen were placed on either hand like wings. But the Britaine forces came leaping forth all abroad by troupes and companies, in such a multitude as never the like else where at any other time, and with so fierce courage, as that they would needs bring their very wives with them, and place them in carts which they had bestowed in the utmost parts of the plaine, to be witnesses of the victorie. Boodicia, having her daughters before her in a chariot, ever as she came to any severall na∣tion (for it was the custome verily of the Britans to make warre under the conduct of women) protested & told them, that she was come then, not as a Lady descended of so noble progenitors, to make either Kingdome or riches her quarrell, but as one of the common people, in revenge of her libertie lost, her body sore whipped, and her daughters chastitie assailed by uncleane handling: That the Romans lust and concupiscence, was growne to such a passe, that they spa∣red no body, no not aged persons, nor left their Virgins undefiled. How be it, the Gods (saith she) are with us, and favor just revenge. For, the legion that came into the field, and durst ha∣zard a battell, was cut in pieces: the rest are either hidden within campe and hold, or else seek meanes to escape by flight: so that they will never abide so much as the noise and crie of so many thousands, much lesse then their violent charge, and close hand fight. If then they would weigh with her the power of their armed forces, and with all the motives of war, resolve they should either to vanquish in that battell, or to die: for her owne part, being but a woman, this was her resolution: the men might live if they pleased, and serve as slaves. Neither could Suetonius himselfe, in so great an extremitie, hold his tongue: For although hee presumed and trusted much upon valour, Sonor Sonores is, the noises. yet enterlaced hee exhortations & praiers. That they should contemne the lowd and vaine threats of the Barbarians. Among whom there were more women to be seene, than lusty young men. Vnwarlike as they were and unarmed, they would presently give ground, when they came once to feele & acknowledge the weapons, & va∣lour of those cōquerors, by whom so often they had bin put to flight. For even in many legions, a few they bee that carry away the honour of the battell: and to their greater glory it would turne, if with a small power they won the fame of a whole armie. Only this they must remem∣ber, marshalled close together as they stood, first with launcing ther Iavelins, and afterwards with the bosses and pikes of their bucklers, and with their swords to continue in beating downe and killing them, and never to think all the while of any booty: for after victory once gotten, all would come to their share. These words of the Captaine, gave such an edge, and kindled their courage so: the old souldiers also experienced in many battels, had so bestirred thēselves, and were so ready to let their darts fly, that Suetonius assured of the event, gave signall of bat∣tell. And first of all, the legion not stirring one foot, but keeping the streights of the place afore∣said, as a sure defence, after that the enemies approching neerer within the just reach of shot, had spent all their darts, sallied out, as it were, in pointed battels. The auxiliarie souldiers like∣wise were of the same stomack, and the horsemen stretching out their long launces, brake what was in their way, and made head against them. The residue shewed their backs, and had much adoe to flie and escape, by reason of the carts and waggons placed round about the plaine, which had blocked up the passages on every side. And the souldiers forbare not the execution so much as of the women: the very horses and draught beasts, were thrust through with darts, which made the heape of dead bodies the greater. This was a day of great honour and renowne, com∣parable to the victories of old time: for, some report, that there were slaine few lesse in num∣ber, than fourescore thousand Britans: but of our souldiers, there died not all out foure hun∣dred, and not many more hurt. Boodicia ended her life with poison. And Poenius Posthu∣mus campe-Master of the second Legion, understanding of this prosperous successe of the four∣teenth, and twentieth Legions, because he had defrauded his owne Legion of the like glorie, and, contrary to the order of service, refused to obey the Captaines commandement, thrust him∣selfe through with his owne sword. After this, the whole armie being rallied together, kept the field still, and lay encamped for to end the residue of the warre: and Caesar augmented their forces by sending out of Germanie two thousand Legionarie souldiers, eight cohorts of auxiliaries, and a thousand horsemen: by whose comming, they of the ninth Legion, had their companies supplied, and made up with the Legioners. The cohorts and cornets of horse, were appointed to lodge in new wintering pla∣ces: and all those nations of the enemies, which were either doubtfull or knowne adversaries, were wasted with fire and sword. But nothing distressed them so much as famine, being negli∣gent in sowing of corne, by reason that of all ages they were given to warre: for that also they made full account to live of our provision, and as all other fierce and stout nations, slowly give eare to peace, because Iulius Cliassicianus, being sent to succeed Catus, and at variance with Suetonius, hindred the common good with private grudges, and had given it out abroad, that they were to expect and tarrie for a new Lieutenant, who without any hostile rancour and pride of a Conqueror, would gently entreat and use with all clemencie such as yielded unto him. With∣all, he sent word to Rome, that they should looke for no end of warre, unlesse some one or other succeeded Suetonius, upon whose overthwartnesse, he laid all his ill proceedings, and attributed all fortunate successe to the happy fortune of the common weale. To see therefore in what state Britaine stood, Polycletus one of Neroes freed men was sent: for, good hope he had, that by his authoritie there should not onely be wrought a perfect agree∣ment betweene the Lieutenant and the Procurator, but also that the rebellious minds of the Barbarians would be won to peace. Neither failed Polycletus, being with his mightie hoast burdensome to Italie and Gaul, after he had passed the Ocean sea, to shew himselfe terrible e∣ven to our souldiers also. But to the enemies he was but a laughing stocke: who, whiles liber∣tie was still fresh on foot among them, knew not what the power of these freed men was: and they made a marvell of it that a Captaine and an armie, which had atchieved so great a war, should yield to obey slaves. But of all these things the best was made to the Emperor. And Suetonius being busied still in these affaires, for that he had lost afterwards some few Gallies upon the shore and the gallie slaves in them, as if the warre continued still, was commanded to deliver up the armie to Petronius Turpilianus, Petronius Turpilianus, Propretor. who now was newly out of his Consulship, as unto a man more exorable-unacquainted with the delinquencies of the enemies, and there∣fore more ready to accept of their repentance: who neither, incensing the enemie, nor provo∣ked by him, Trebellius Maximus Propretor. colouring a lazie and idle life with the honest name of peace, after hee had dared and done no more▪ but composed former troubles and debates, delivered the charge of the pro∣vince unto Trebellius Maximus. But he, a man unfit for action, and altogether unexpert in war-service, by a kind of cour∣teous and mild regiment entertained the country in quiet. For now the Britaines also had learned the good manners, not rudely to repulse the sugred assaults of flattering vices; and the disturbance of civill dissentions comming between, ministred a lawfull excuse for his do∣ing nothing. But much discord arose among them whiles the souldier, accustomed to war∣fare, waxt wanton with ease, and grew to be mutinous: and he for his niggardly sparing and base taking of bribes, was both despised and hated of the armie. This hatred of theirs a∣gainst him, was enflamed by Roscius Caelius Lieutenant of the twentieth Legion, an ancient enemie of his, but now by occasion of civill dissentions, they were fallen out farther, and brake into more heinous tearmes. Trebellius objected ever and anon to Caelius, and charged him with factious behaviour, and confounding the order of discipline: Caelius againe, that Trebellius had spoiled and beggered the Legions. But in the meane time, whiles the Lieute∣nants thus jarred, the modest cariage of the armie was marred: and the discord at length grew so great, that Trebellius was driven away with the railing of the Auxiliaries also, in cohorts and wings sorting themselves to Caelius side, was glad, as a man forsaken, to give place and flie to Vitellius. The Province although the Consular Lieutenant Generall was absent remained in quiet: whiles the Lieutenants of the Legions supplied the charge in right of equall authoritie: But Caelius indeed bare the greater stroke, because he was of more boldnesse. Whiles the Civill war betweene Galba, Vectias Bola¦nus Proprae∣tor. Otho and Vitellius grew hot, Vectius Bolanus was by Vitellius sent to succeed him. Neither troubled he Britanny with any discipline. The same default continued still against the enimies, and the like licentiousnesse in the campe: saving onely that Bolanus a good honest harmelesse man, and not odious for committing any crime, had wonne himselfe love and good will in lieu of obedience: and albeit Vitellius sent for aids out of Britanny, yet Bolanus made no hast, for that Britain was never quiet enough. As for the Island, that great favour and reputation in warlike affaires, which Vespasian had got∣ten, being Lieutenant there of the second Legion under Claudius, did easily win it unto him, yet not without some stir of the other Legions: wherein many centurions and souldiers who had bin advanced by Vitellius were loth to change that Prince whom they had proved already. And besides, the souldiers of the fourteenth Legion, called the subduers of Britain, removed from thence by Nero to the Caspian wars, and in the quarrell of Otho vanquished, were by Vitellius sent backe into Britanny, and called away againe by Mutianus letters. For all this civill warre, no quarrell nor mutinies there were in the Britaine armie. And to say a truth, during all the troubles of civill warres, no Legions behaved themselves more harmelesse, either because they were farre off and severed by the Ocean, or for that they were taught by continuall service and soulderie, to hate the rather all hostility and dealing with e∣nemies. Howbeit by meanes of these dissentions and rumours still of civill war, the Britaines tooke heart and rebelled, through the procurement of Venusius: who besides a natu∣rall fiercenesse of courage, and hatred of the Roman name, was incensed particularly by pri∣vate unkindnesses between him and his wife Queene Carthismandua. Cartismandua. This Carthismandua was Queene of the Brigantes, of high and noble linag, who upon the delivery of King Ca∣ractacus whom shee tooke by fraud and sent to furnish and set out the triumph of Claudius (that glorious spectacle, I meane in manner of a triumph, wherein Caractacus was shewed) had woon favour with the Romans and greatly increased her strength. Whereupon ensued wealth: of wealth and prosperitie riotous and incontinent life: in so much, that casting off Venusius her husband, and intercepting his kinsfolke, shee joyned her selfe in marriage with Vellocatus his harnesse-bearer, and crowned him King: which foule fact was the overthrow immediately of her house. The good will of the country went generally with the lawfull hus∣band: but the Queenes intemperate affections were peremptory and violent in maintaining her minion the adulterer. Whereupon Venutius, by the helpe of friends which he procured, and the revolt of the Brigantes themselves, made warre upon Carthismandua, and brought her into great extremities. Then upon her instant praier unto the Romans for aid, our garrisons, cohorts and wings were sent to defend her: which after sundry skirmishes with divers event, delivered the Queenes person out of perill, but the kingdome remained to Venutius, and the warre unto us. Now when as the state of Rome Citie, Vespasian Emperor. Jul. Agrico Lieutenant over the twentieth Legion. was for Vespasian governed by Mutianus, hee made Iulius Agricola who was gone to side with Vespasian, and had behaved himselfe with great integritie and courage, Lieutenant of the two and twentieth Legion in Britanny, a Le∣gion which slowly had sworne allegiance to Vespasian, In which province his predecessour by report seditiously demeaned himselfe. For the said Legion was out of awe, or rather it over∣awed even Lieutenants generall that had beene Consuls. Neither was the ordinarie Legions Lieutenant, who had beene but Praetor, of power sufficient to restrain and keepe it under, whe∣ther it were through his owne weaknesse, or the stubborne disposition of the souldiers, it is not certaine. Thus being elected both to succeede and revenge, hee shewed an example of most rare moderation in making choice to bee thought rather to have found them, than to have made them dutifull souldiers. And albeit that Vectius Bolanus Lieutenant Generall of Bri∣tannie for the time being, governed in a gentler and milder manner, than was fit for so fierce a Province: Yet under him Agricola cunningly conforming himselfe to that humor, and not unlearned to joyne profitable counsels with honest, tempered the heat of his owne nature that it might not grow upon him still. But when as Vespasian recovered together with the rest of the world, Britanny also; brave captaines, good souldiers were sent, and the enemies hope was greatly abated. For straight∣waies Petilius Cerialis strooke a terror into them, Petilius Cere∣alis Proprae∣tor. by invading at his first entry the Brigantes, thought to be the most populous state of the whole Province. Many battels were fought, and some bloudy: And the greatest of the Brigantes he either conquered or wasted. And whereas Cerialis would doubtlesse have dimmed the diligence and fame of another successor, Julius Fronti∣nus Proprae∣tor. Iulius Frontinus a great man sustained also as hee might, after such a predecessor that waightie charge with reputation and credit: who subdued the puissant and warlike peo∣ple of the Silures, where he had beside the vertue of the enemie, struggled with the streights and difficult places. In this estate Agricola found the Province, and the wars thus far proceeded in, when as about the middest of summer he passed the seas: Jul. Agricola Propraetor. at what time the souldiers, as if the season were past, attended an end for that yeare of their service, and the enemie occasions to begin for to hurt. The Ordovices a little before he entred the land, had hewed almost wholly in pieces a wing which lay in their borders. Vpon which beginning the countrey being awaked, as men desirous of warre allowed the example: and some staied to see how the new Lieutenant would take it. Then Agricola, although the Summer was spent, and the bands lay dispersed in the Pro∣vince, and his souldiers had fully presumed of rest for that yeare, which hindred much, and crossed directly his undertaking of warre, most men also being of opinion, rather to keepe and assure the places suspected, all this notwithstanding, resolved fully to encounter the danger: having gathered therefore the ensignes of the Legions, and some few Auxiliaries, because the Ordovices durst not descend into indifferent ground, himselfe before the voward, to give o∣thers like courage in the like danger, led up in battell-ray to encounter the enemie. And having slaughtered almost the whole nation, knowing full well that fame must with instance be follow∣ed, and as the first fell out, so the rest would succeede, hee deliberated to conquer the Island Anglesey. Mona, from the possession whereof, as before I have rehearsed, Paullinus was revoked by the generall rebellion of Britannie: But as in purposes not resolved on before, ships being wanting, the pollicie and resolutenesse of the captaine devised a passage over. For he comman∣ded the most choise of the Aid-souldiers, to whom all the foords and shallowes were knowne, and who after the usuall practise of their countrie, were able in swimming to governe all at once themselves, their armour and horses, laying aside their carriage, to put over at once, and suddenly invade them. Which thing so amazed the enemie, attending for a fleet, for shipping, for tide, that they surely believed nothing could bee hard or invincible to men that came so minded to war. Whereupon they humbly intreated for peace, and yielded the Island. Thus A∣gricola at his first entry into this province (which time other consume in vaine ostentation or ambitious seeking of complements) entring withall into labors and dangers, became famous indeed and of great reputation. Neither abused Agricola the prosperous proceeding of his affaires to vanity or braving in speeches, as to tearme it an exploit or a conquest, thus to have kept in order persons subdued before: or to bedeck with lawrell his letters of advertisement, but by stopping and suppressing the fame he augmented it the more: whiles men began to discourse, upon what great presump∣tions of future successe, hee should make so light an account of such great actions already per∣formed, as not to speake a word of them. Now as touching civill government: Agricola knowing right well the disposition and mind of the Province, taught also by the experience of others, that armes availe little to set∣tle a new conquered State, if injuries and wrongs bee permitted, determined to cut off all causes of warres. And beginning at home, his owne house first of all he reformed and restrai∣ned, a point of as much hardnesse with many, as to governe a province. He committed no man∣ner of publike affaires to bond men or freed; hee admitted no souldier about his person either upon private affection of partiall suiters; or upon the commendation and intreatie of Centuri∣ons, but elected simply the best, presuming the same to be the most faithfull. He would see into all things, but not exact all things to the rigor: Light faults he would pardon, and the great severely correct: not alwaies proceeding to punish, but often content with repentance: chu∣sing rather not to preferre unto office and charge such as were like to offend, than after offence to condemne them. The augmentation of corne and tributes, he mollified with equall dividing of charge and burthen, cutting away those petty extortions, which grieved the subject more than the tribute it selfe. For, the poore people were constained in a mockery to waite at the barnes fast locked against them, and first to buy the corne, then after to sell it at a price. Severall waies were enioyned, and far distant places by the purveiors commandement: that the country should carry from the neerest standing-camps to those which were far off & out of the way, till that which lay open to all, and at hand, was turned in fine to the gaine of a few. By repressing these abuses presently in his first yeare, a good opinion was conceived from him of peace, which either by the negligence or connivence of former Lieutenants was now no lesse feared than warre. At this time died Vespasian, unto whom for these victories of the leaders, and his owne vertue under Claudius, Valerius Flaccus before his Poeme thus speaketh; Tu{que} ô pelagi cui major aperti Fama, Caledonius post quam tua carbasa vexit Oceanus, Phrygios prius indignatus Iulos. And thou, for seas discovery whose fame did more appeare, Since time thy ships with sailes full spred in Northerne Ocean were, Which of the Trojan Julii erst did scorne the sailes to beare. But when that Noble Titus, THE LOVELY Deareling AND JOY OF THE WORLD succeeded his father, Titus Empe∣ror. Agricola when summer was once come, assembling his armie together, those souldiers of his who in marching behaved themselves in modest sort hee commended, the loose and dissolute straglers he checked. The places for pitching the campe hee designed himselfe; the friths he sounded, and the thickets he proved first in his owne person: not suffe∣ring in the meane season any corner in the enemies country to be quiet: but wasting and spoi∣ling with sudden excursions and roads: But when he had throughly terrified them, then would he againe spare and forbeare, alluring thereby their minds to friendship and peace. Vp∣on which kind of proceeding, many states that stood upon termes of equalitie before that day, gave hostages and meekely submitted themselves, receiving garrison, and permitting to for∣tifie, which he so wisely and with such great foresight and reason performed that nothing was ever attempted against them: whereas before, no new fortified place in all Britanny escaped unassailed. The winter ensuing was spent in most profitable and politicke devises. For, whereas the Britaines were rude and dispersed, and therefore prone upon every occasion to warre, hee to in∣duce them by pleasures unto quietnesse and rest, exhorted them in private, and helpt them in common to build temples, houses and places of publique resort, commending the forward and checking the slow: imposing thereby a kind of necessitie upon them whiles each man contended to gaine honour and reputation thereby. And now by this time the Noble mens sonnes he tooke and instructed in the liberall sciences, preferring the wits of the Britaines before the students of France, as being now curious to attaine the eloquence of the Roman language, whereas they lately rejected their speech. After that, our attire grew to be in account and the Gowne much used among them. S , by little and little they fell to these provocations of vices, to sumptuous galleries & bathes, yea and exquisite banquettings: which things the ignorant termed civility being indeed a part of their bondage. In the third yeare of his wars, he discovered new coun∣tries, wasting along till he came to the firth of Tau Firth. Twede as some think Taus. Which thing so terrified the enemies; that although the armie was toiled out with cruell tempests, yet durst they not assaile them: and the Romans moreover had leasure & space to fortifie there. They which were skilfull that way, observed, that never any Captine did more advisedly chuse his places. No Castle planted by Agricola ever was, either forced by strength, or upon conditions surrendred, or as not defensi∣ble, forsaken. Many times they issued forth: for, against a long siege, they were stored with a whole yeares provision. So, they wintered there without feare, every garrison guarding it selfe and needing no helpe of their neighbours, the enemies assaulting sometimes, but in vaine, with∣out successe, and driven thereupon to despaire. For, the losses of Summer they were commonly wont before, to repaire with winter events: but now, summer and winter alike they went to the worse. In all these actions, Agricola never sought to draw unto himselfe, the glory of any exploit done by another: but were it Centurion, or of other degree, hee would faithfully witnesse the fact, and yield him alwaies his due commendation. By some, hee is said to have beene somewhat bitter in checks and rebukes: and indeed, the man was, as toward the good of a most sweet disposition, so to the bad and lewd persons unpleasant and sower enough. But this choler passed away with his words: closenesse in him and silence you needed not to feare: hee esteemed it more honest to offend, then to hate. The fourth summer was spent in perusing, and ordering that which he had over-run. And if the valiant minds of the armies, and glory of the Roman name, could have permitted or ac∣cepted it so, The Fir h of Dunbrit∣son. they needed not to have sought other limit of Britaine. For, Glotta and Bodotria two armes of two contrary seas, shooting a mightie way into the land, are onely divided a sun∣der by a narrow partition of ground: Edenbo∣rough Irith. which passage was guarded and fortified then with gar∣rison and castle: so that the Romans were absolute Lords of all on this side, having cast out the enemie, as it were, into another Island. The fifth yeare of the warre, Agricola first taking sea there, went over, and subdued with many and prosperous conflicts nations before that time unknowne: and he furnished with for∣ces, that part of Britannie, Ireland. which lieth against Ireland, more in hope, than for feare. For Ire∣land, if it might have beene wonne, lying between Britannie and Spaine, and fitly also for the French sea, would aptly have united, to the great advantage of the one and the other, these strongest members of the Empire together. In bignesse it is inferiour to Britannie: howbeit, bigger than the Islands of our sea. The soile, and temperature of the aire, the nature and fa∣shions differ not much from the British. The ports and places of accesse, are better knowne by reason of more commerce and frequenting of merchants. Agricola had received before, a Prince of that country driven out by civill dissention, whom under colour of courtesie and friendship, he retained till occasion should serve. I have heard him oftentimes say, that with one Legion, and some few Aides, Ireland might bee wonne and possessed: that it were also a strength for our British affaires, If the Roman forces were planted each-where, and libertie banisht, as it were, quite out of sight. About this time died Titus, who for these valiant Acts exploited by Agricola, was the fifteenth ime named Imperator, as Xiphilinus writeth, and an ancient piece of coine witnesseth with him. Then Agricola under Domitian in the summer which began the sixth yeare of his office, because a generall rising in armes of all the farther Nations, beyond Bodotria was feared, & passages were all beset with a power of the enemies, manned a fleet to search the Creeks and Harboroughes of that ample region, which lieth beyond it. Which being by Agricola then first taken, and emploied as a part of his strength, followed after a long, and made a goodly brave shew, while at one time warre both by sea and land went forward. And oft it so chanced, that the horseman, footman, and sea-souldier met, and made merrie in the same campe one with another, extolling and magnifying, each their owne prowesse and adven∣tures: making their vaunts & comparisons souldier-like, the one of the woods & high moun∣taines, the other of dangerous tempests and billowes: the one, of the land and enemie conque∣red, the other of the Ocean subdued. The Britains, as by the prisoners was understood, were a∣mazed also at the sight of the navie, as though now the secrets of their sea were disclosed, and no refuge remained if they were overcome. Whereupon the Caledonians arming with great pre∣paration, and greater bruit thereof, as the manner is of matters unknowne, having of them∣selves first set in hand to assault our Castles, braved our men, and put them in feare as Chalen∣gers: in so much that some of our side, who would seeme to be wise, but were dastards indeed, counselled the Generall to retire on this side Bodotria, and that the best course was to depart of their own accord, rather than to be repelled with shame: in the mean while Agricola takes know∣ledge, that the enemies meant to divide themselves, and to give the onset in severall Compa∣nies: whereupon lest hee should bee enclosed about, and entrapped by their multitude, and skill in the country, he also marched with his armie divided in three. Which when it was knowne to the enemie, they on a sodaine changing advise, and uniting their forces together, joyntly as∣saulted by night the ninth Legion, as being of weakest resistance: and having slaine the watch, partly asleep, and partly amazed with feare, brake into the campe. And now were they fighting within the very trenches, when Agricola having intelligence given him by Spies, what way the enemies had taken and following withall their footsteps, commanded the lightest horsemen and footmen to play on their backs, and maintaine the skirmish, and the whole armie anone, to second them with a shout. And when it drew neere to day, the glittering of the ensignes was seene. So the Britaines were quailed with a duple danger: but the Romans recovered courage againe, and being past perill of their persons, fought now for their honour, freshly assailing their late assailers. And verily within the streights of the gates, the conflict was sharpe and cruell, till in the end the enemies were forced to flie; whilest both our armies contended: the one would seeme to have helped their fellows, the other to have needed none other to help them: and if the bogs and wood had not covered their flight, that one victory had ended the warre. Vpon this battell so manfully fought, so famously wonne, the armie presuming, that to their prowesse all things were easie and open, cried, To lead into Caledonia, and to find out the limit of Britan with a course of a continued Conquests: and even those who ere while were so warie and wise, waxt forward enough after the event, and grew to speak bigly: such is the hard con∣dition of warres; If ought fall out well, all challenge a part, misfortunes are ever imputed to one. Contrariwise, the Britans presupposing that not valour, but the cunning of the Generall, by using the occasion had carried it away, abated no whit of their stomacke; but armed their youth, transported their children and wives into places of safetie, and sought by assemblies and reli∣gious rites, to establish an association of their Cities and States together. And so for that yeare both parties departed away incensed. The same summer, a cohort of Vsipians, levied in Germanie, and sent over into Britan, com∣mitted a hainous and memorable Act. Those a∣bout Zut∣phen. For having slaine a Centurion, and certaine souldiers intermingled among other manciples, and set over them for direction of discipline, they fled and embarqued themselves in three pinnaces, compelling by force the Masters of the said ves∣sels, to execute their charge: and only one doing his office, the other two being suspected, and thereupon slaine, this strange going out, and putting to sea, the fact as yet not noised abroade, was gazed and wondred at: afterwards being driven uncertainly hither and thither, and ha∣ving skirmished with the Britains standing in defence of their owne, often prevailing and sometimes repulsed, they came at last to that miserie, that they were enforced to eat one ano∣ther, first the weakest, Britaine is s iled round about. then as the lot lighted. Thus after they had floated round about Britain, and lost their vessels for lacke of government, they were intercepted first by the Suevians, then by Frisians, as Pirats and Rovers. Now, some of them there were, that being bought by merchants as slaves, and by change of Masters brought to our side of the river grew into a name by giving first notice of so great and so rare an adventure. In the beginning of Summer, Agricola was deepely touched with a grievous mischance that happened in his owne house: for, he lost his owne Sonne about a yeare old. Which infortu∣nate hap, he neither bare out, as most of these great men do in the like case, vaine-gloriously, nor tooke it againe so impatiently with sorrow and lamentation, as women are wont: and amidst his mourning, used the warre as one of his remedies. Therefore having sent his fleete afore, which by spoiling in sundry places, should induce a greater and more uncertaine terrour upon his enemies, hee made ready, and followed after with his armie, joyning thereto some of the valiantest Britaines, whom by long experience in peace, he had found most faithfull, and so came as farre as to the mount Grampias, Gran ∣bani. where the enemies were lodged before. For the Britans nothing danted with the event of the former battell, and attending for nothing else but revenge or servitude, and being taught at length, that common danger must bee repelled with concord, by embassages and league made, had raised the power of all their Cities and States together. And now by this time there were entred into the field, the view being taken, above thirty thousand armed men: besides an endlesse number of youth, which daily flocked to them still, yea, and lusty old men renowned in warr, and bearing every one the badge due to their honour: at what time, among many other leaders, Galgacus for his valour & birth the princi∣pall man, Galgacus seeing the multitude thus assembled hotly to demand battell, is said to have used this speech unto them: When I view and consider the causes of this warre, and our present neces∣sitie, I have reason, me seemes, to presume, that this day, and this your agreeing consent, will give a happy beginning to the freedome of the whole Island. For, both have we all hitherto li∣ved in liberty; & besides, no land remaineth beyond, no, nor so much as sea for our safegard: The Romane navie, thus as you see, hoovering upon our coasts: so that Combat and armes, which valiant men desire for honour, the dastard must also use for his best securitie: the former battels which have with divers events been fought against the Romanes, had their hope and refuge resting in our hands: Because we, the flower of the British Nobilitie, and seated therefore the furthermost in, never seeing the coasts of the countries which serve in slaverie, have kept even our eies unpolluted, and free from all contagion of tyrannie. Be∣yond us is no land, beside us none are free; us hitherto this very corner, and the inward recesse, as it were, of fame hath defended. Now the uttermost point of Britannie is laid open: & things, the lesse they have bin within knowledge, the greater is the glory to atchive them. But no nation now is there beyond us; nothing but water, nothing but rockes, and the Ro∣mans even among them, more infest than all besides. Whose intolerable pride in vaine shall a man seeke to avoide with any obsequious service, and humble behaviour: Robbers as they be of the world, who having now left no more land to spoile, search also the sea. If their ene∣mies be rich, they covet their wealth: if poore, they seeke to gaine glorie: Whom neither the East nor the West, is ever able to satisfie: the onely men of all memorie, that seeke out all places, be they wealthy, or be they poore with like affection. To take away by maine force, to kill and to spoile, they fasly terme Empire and government: when they lay all waste as a wildernesse, that they call peace. That every man should hold his owne children and bloud most deare, Nature hath ordeined: and even those are pressed for souldiers, and carried a∣way to serve as slaves elswhere. Our wives and sisters, if they be not violently forced as in open hostilitie, are in the meane time under the colour and title of friends, and guests often abused. Our goods and substance, they draw from us for tribute, our corne for provi∣sion. Our verie bodies and hands they weare out and consume, in paving of bogs; and rid∣ding of woods, with a thousand stripes and reproachfull indignities besides. Slaves yet, which be borne to bondage, are bought and sold once for all, and afterwards fedde and found at their owners expences. But Britannie daily buyeth, dayly feedeth, and is at daily charge with her owne bondage. And as in a private retinue of houshold servants, the fresh man and last commer, is laughed and scoffed at by his very fellowes: even so, in this old servi∣tude of the whole world, our destruction only is sought, as being the latest and vilest in ac∣count of all other. For, fields we have none to manure, no mines to be digged, no ports to trade in, for which purposes and emploiments we should be reserved alive. And as for the manhood and fierce courage of the subject, it pleaseth not much the jelous Soveraign. And this very corner being so secret and far out of the way, the more security it yeeldeth to us, in them it works the greater suspicion. So seeing all hope of pardon is past, at the length take courage, to defend and maintaine your safety as well as your honor, things most deere and pretious unto you. The Trinobantes, led by a woman fired a Colonie, forced campe and ca∣stle; and if such a lucky beginning had not ended in sloth and security, they might with ease have shaken off the yoke, We as yet were never touched, never foiled nor subdued: as men therefore that mind to maintain their freedome, not for the present but for ever, let us shew straitwaies in the first joining, what manner of men Caledonia reserved in store for herselfe. Or do yee thinke the Romanes to be as valiant in war, as they are wanton in peace? No, it is not by their owne vertue, but by our farrings and discords they are grown into fanie, and the faults of their enemies they abuse to the glory of their owne armie, composed of most di∣vers nations, and therefore as by present prosperity holden together, so if fortune once frowne it doubtlesse will dissolve: unlesse ye suppose, the Frenchmen and Germanes, and (to our shame be it spoken) many of our owne Nation which now lend their lives to establish a forrain usurper, and yet have beene enemies longer than servants, to be led and induced with any true harted and loyall affection. Nay, it is feare and terror, weake links and bounds of love: Remove them once, those which shall cease to feare, will soone begin to hate. All things to in∣cite unto victory are on our side. No wife to encourage the Romanes, no parents to upbraid them if they flee: most have either no country at all, or els some other. A few fearefull persons trembling and gazing all about at the strangenesse of heaven it selfe, of sea, of woods and all things els, the Trinobantes. Gods have delivered, mewd up as it were and fettered, into our hands. Let the vaine shew and glittering of gold and silver terrifie us, which neither defendeth nor of∣fendeth. And even amongst our enemies in the field we shall find of our side. The Britaines will agnize their owne cause. The French will call to remembrance their freedome and for∣mer estate: the rest of the Germans will leave and forsake them as of late the Vsipians did. And what else then have we to feare? the Castles are emptie, the colonies peopled with aged and impotent persons: the free Cities discontent and in factions, whiles those which are under, obey with ill will, and they that doe governe, rule against right. Here is the Generall, and here is the armie: There are the tributes, there be the mettall mines, and other miseries inseperably following them that live under the subjection of others: which either to continue and endure forever, or straight to revenge, it lieth this day in this field. Wherefore, as yee are going to battell, beare in your minds both the freedome of your ancestors, and the bondage of your posteritie. This speech they cheerefully received, as well with a song after their barbarous m ner, as with confused acclamations and dissonant noises. And as the companies clustered together and glittering armour appeared, whiles the boldest advanced forward, and withall, the rankes were putting themselves in array; Agricola, albeit his souldiers were glad of that day, and scarce with words could be with-holden, supposing it best to say somewhat, encouraged them in this wise. Fellow souldiers and companions in armes: Your faithfull service and diligence these 8. yeares so painfully shewed, by the vertue and fortune of the Roman Empire, hath conquered red Britanny. In so many journies, in so many battells, we were of necessitie to shew our selves either valiant against the enemie, or patient and laborious almost above and against nature it selfe. In which exploits wee have hitherto borne our selves both, so that neither desired I better souldiers, nor you other Captaine. Insomuch as we have exceeded the limits, I, of my predecessor, and you of yours. To the end of Britannie wee have found, not by fame and report, but we are with our armes and pavillions really invested thereof. Britain I say, is found and subdued. In marching, when the passage over bogs, mountaines and rivers toiled you out, how oft have I heard every valiant souldier say, when will the enemie present himselfe? when shall wee fight? Loe, they are now put up out of their holes, and hither they are come. Your wish, loe, is here, and place for your vertue: yea and all things to follow in an easie and expedite course if you win: but all against you, if you leese. For, as to have gone so much ground, escaped through the woods, passed over the friths, is honourable forward; so, if we doe flee, the vantages wee have this day will become our greatest disadvantage. For wee are not skilled so well in the country, we have not the like store of provision: but hands wee have and weapons, and therein all things included. For my part, I am long since resolved, that it is not safetie either for souldier or Generall to shew their backs, and therefore a commendable death is better than life with reproach, and commonly, safetie and honour are dwelling toge∣ther: or if ought should mishappen, even this will bee a glory, to have died in the uttermost end of nhe world and nature. If new nations and souldiers unknowne were in the field, I would by the example of other armies embolden and encourage you: now, recount you your owne vi∣ctorious exploits, and aske your owne eies. These are the same men, which the last yeare assai∣led one legion by stealth in the night, and were by a blast of your mouth overthrowne: These of all other Britans, have been the most nimble in running away, and therefore have scaped the longest alive. For, as in forrests and woods, the strongest beasts are chased away by main force, the cowardly and fearefull are scared with the very noise of the hunters: so the most valiant of the British nation, long since have been by you dispatched and slaine, the rascall herd of da∣stardly cowards only remaineth: whom at length we have found, not as having intended to stay and make head, but at last overtaken, and by extreme passion of feare standing as stocks, presenting occasion to us in this place of a worthy and memorable victory. Make an end there∣fore once for all of your warfare: and to fiftie yeares travells let this day impose a glorious conclusion: Approve to your country, that the Armie could never justly be charged, either with protracting the warre, or pretences for not accomplishing the conquest. As Agricola was yet speaking, the souldiers gave great tokens of fervencie, and when hee had ended, seconded the speech with a joyfull applause, and ran straightwaies to their weapons. Agricola seeing them sufficiently animated, and rushing furiously forward, ordered his men in this manner. With the auxiliary footmen being eight thousand, he fortified the middle bat∣tell: three thousand of their horse he put on both sides in the wings: commanding the Legi∣ons to stand behind before the trench of the camp to the greater glory of the victory, if it were obtained without shedding any Roman bloud, otherwise, for assistance and succour, if the vantgard should be repelled. The Britans were marshalled on the higher ground, fitly both for shew, and also to terrifie: The first battalion standing on the plaine, the rest in the assent of the hill knit and rising, as it were, one over another. The middle of the field was filled with the clattering of chariots and horsemen. Then Agricola perceiving the ene∣my to exceed him in number, and fearing lest hee should be assailed on the front and flancks both at one instant: displaied his army in length: and although by that meanes his battell would become disproportionably long, and many advised him to take in the Legions, Yet being more forward to hope, than yeelding to feare, he rejected the counsell, and leaving his horse himselfe before the ensignes on foot. In the first encounter before the joining, both sides discharged and threw: Wherein the Britans both employing art, and shewing resolution with their great swords and little tar∣guets a voided our shot, or shooke them off; darting withall great store of theirs against us: till at length Agricola spying his vantage, exhorted three Batavian cohorts, and two of the Tun∣grians to presse forward and bring the matter to handy strokes and dint of sword: a thing, which they in respect of long service were able readily to performe: and contrariwise to the enemy prejudiciall and hurtfull, by reason of their small bucklers and huge swords, For the swords of the Britans being blunt pointed were no way for the close or for the open fight. Now as the Batavians began to deale blowes and lay about them, to strike with the pikes of their bucklers; to mangle their faces, and having overborne in the plaine all that resisted, to march up the hill, the rest of the cohorts gathering heart, upon emulation, violently beat downe all about them, and many halfe dead or wholly untouched were left, for hast of winning the victory. In the meane time, the troups of the horsemen began to flee: and the charriotters mingled themselves with the battell of the footmen: who albeit they had lately terrified others, were now distressed themselves, by the unevennesse of the ground, and thicke rankes of their ene∣mies. Neither was the forme of this fight, like a loose skirmish of horsemen to and fro. But standing still, and maintaining their places, they sought withall by maine weight of horses to breake in and beare downe one another. The wandring waggons also and masterlesse horses affrighted, as feare caried them, over-bare many times, those which met them, or thwarted their way. Now, the Britans, which stood aloofe from the battell, on the heigth of the hils, and at their good leasure disdained our fewnesse, began to come downe by little and little, and to wheele about the backs of our men that were now in traine of winning the field; but that Agricola suspecting as much, opposed against them foure wings of horsemen purposely retained about him, for sudden dispatch, and all chances of war; and so, by repulsing them backe, as sharply as they ran fiercely to assaile, put them in rout. Thus the counsell of the Bri∣tans turned upon their owne heads, and the wing, by commandement of the leader turning quite from the battell in front, followed the enemy at the back, and pursued the chase. Then might you have seen in the open fields a grievous and pitifull spectacle, coursing, wounding, taking, and killing of them that were taken, when others were offred. Now whole regiments of the enemies according to their severall dispositions, armed though they were, and more in number, turned their backs to the fewer: others unarmed sought their own death, offring themselves voluntarily to the slaughter. Every where there lay scattered, weapons, bodies, and mangled limbs, and the ground was every where embrued with bloud: and sometime even in them that were overcome, appeared both anger and valour: For, when they approa∣ched the woods, uniting themselves; they entrapped unawares some of the formost of our men which unadvisedly followed, not knowing the country. And but that Agricola with his presence every where assisted at need, setting about them certain cohorts of his bravest and most ready footmen, as it were in forme of a toile, and commanding some of his horsemen to forego their horses where the passes were narrow, and others, where the wood was thin to enter on horseback, no doubt we had taken some blow by our overmuch boldnesse. But after they saw our men again in strong array and good order to follow the chase, they fled, not in troupes as before, and attending each other, but utterly disbanded and single, and eschuing all company, toward the farre remote and desart places. The night and our satiet e of bloud made an end of the chase. Of the enemies side ten thousand were slaine: three hundred and forty of ours. Amongst whom was Aulus Atticus Captaine of a cohort, upon a youthfull heat of his owne, and through the fierce spirit of his horse, being carried into the midst of his enemies. That night, the winners for their parts solaced themselves with the victorie and spoile: and the Britans scattering out of order, crying and howling, (men and women toge∣ther) take and draw with them their hurt persons, call unto them that were not hurt, forsake their owne houses, and in despight also set them on fire themselves: chuse out holes for to lurke in, and straight-waies forsake them; communicate some counsels together, and then have some glimmering of hope: sometime at the sight of their deerliest beloved moved to pitie, more often stirred to rage: and certaine it is, that some, as by way of compassion and mercie, slew their owne wives and children. The day following discovered more plainely the great∣nesse of the victorie. Every where desolation and silence: no stirring in the mountaines: the houses fired and smoaking a far off: no man to meet with our spies; who being sent abroad into all quarters found by their footsteps the flight was uncertaine, and that they were no where in companies together. Whereupon Agricola, because the summer was spent, and the warre could not conveniently bee divided; bringeth his armie into the borders of the Now calle Anguse, as some thinke. Horrestians: where receiving hostages he commanded the Admirall of his navie to saile a∣bout Britaine, lending him souldiers and strength for that purpose, and the terrour of the Roman name was gone already before. Himselfe, with easie and gentle journies, to terrifie the new conquered nations with the very stay of his passage, disposed his footmen and horse∣men in their wintering places▪ and withall the navy with prosperous wind and successe ari∣ved at the port Some read, Rhutupensis, which is sup∣posed to be Richborow neere Sand∣witch. Britaine is for certaine avou∣ched to be an Island. The Islands Orkneys. Trutulensis, from whence it departed, and coasting along the neerest side of Britaine returned thither againe. Then and never before, the Roman fleet having dou∣bled the point of the utmost sea discovered and reported, Britan to bee an Island, and withall found out and subdued the Isles of Orkney, before that time never knowne, which Orosius and as many writers as follow him ascribe falsly unto Claudius. This state of affaires in Britaine Agricola signified by letter without any amplifying termes, to Domitian: who after his man∣ner, with a cheerefull countenance and grieved heart, received the newes: being inwardly pricked, to think that his late counterfeit triumph of Germany, wherein certaine slaves bought for mony were attired, and their haire dressed as captives of that country, was had in derision and justly skorned abroad: whereas now, a true and great victorie, so many thousands of ene∣mies being slaine, was famous and currant in every mans mouth: that it were indeed a most perilous point if a private mans name should bee exalted above the name of the Prince. Mary then in vaine had he suppressed the study of Oratory, and all other worthy politick arts, if he should in military glory be despised by another: For other matters might more easily be passed over; but to be a good commander of an army was a vertue above private estate; and peculiar for a Prince. With these and the like cares being tormented, and musing much in his closet alone, which was a token and signe of some crueltie intended, hee thought it yet best for the present to dissemble and put over his malice, untill the heate of Agricola his glory, and love of his souldiers were somewhat abated: for, as yet he remained in charge. Where∣fore he commanded that all the honours of triumphall ornaments, image triumphall and what else usually was conferred in lieu of triumph, should in Senate bee awarded unto him in most ample and honourable termes: and sending a successor, caused withall a bruit to be spred, that the province of Syria then lying void by the death of Atilius Rufus a consular Lieutenant, and reserved for men of great qualitie, was purposed unto him. And a common opinion went, that Domitian sending one of his most secret and trusty servants to Agricola, sent withall the patent of Syria with instruction, that if he were in Britaine it should be delivered: and that the same man meeting Agricola as he crossed the seas, without speaking unto him or doing his message, returned againe to Domitian. Whether this were true or fained and surmised pro∣bably, as correspondent to the Princes disposition, I cannot affirme: But in the meane season Agricola had delivered to his successor the Province in good and peaceable state. And lest his arrivall at Rome should bee noted, by reason of the multitudes of people, which would goe out to see & to meet him, cutting off that courtesie of his friends, he entred the City by night, and by night came to the palace as he was willed. Where, being admitted to the Princes pre∣sence, and received with a short salutation and no speech, he sorted himselfe with the rest of the waiters. Salustius Lu∣cullus Lieute∣nant Generall over Britaine. Arviragus the Britaine. Agricola had for his successor, as others thinke, Cn. Trebellius, but, as I take it, Sa∣lustius Lucullus, whom Domitian straight after slew, because he suffered certain spears of a new fashion to be called Luculleae. At which time also, Arviragus flourished in this Island, and not in the daies of Claudius, as Geffrey of Monmouth dreameth. For these verses of Juvenall are to bee understood of Domitian: —Omen habes magni clari{que} triumphi: Regem aliquem capies, aut de temone Britanno Excidet The old scholiast upon Juvenal cal∣leth him Arbila. Arviragus— A powerfull osse and signe thou hast, presaging triumph great: Some King (sure (thou shalt prisoner take in chase or battell heate: Or else Arviragus shall lose his British royall seat. There flourished likewise at Rome Claudia Rufina, Rufina, a Bri∣tish dame. a British dame, passing well lear∣ned, and withall as beautifull, whom Martiall commendeth in these verses; Claudia caeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis Edita, cur By the like phrase in ano∣ther Epigram he saith, Ab∣deritane pecto∣ra plebis habet; speaking of a doltish and grosse headed fellow. Latiae pectora plebis habet? Quale decus formae? Romanam credere matres Italides possunt, Atthides esse suam. Sith from blew Britans Claudia Rufina doth descend, How comes a learned Latian brest her person to commend? How beautifull! Italian dames may her a Roman make: And Attick wives againe full well, her for their daughter take. This was, as John Bale and Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterburie have writ∣ten, the very same woman, of whom S. Paul maketh mention in his latter Epistle to Timothy) neither is the computation of times repugnant, howsoever others be of a contrary opinion. Thus under the Empire of Domitian, when that farther part therof, as being rough and unfruitfull, Britaine be∣come a Pro∣vince. Britaine a Presidiall Province. was left unto the barbarous Britans, this hither side was reduced full and whole into the forme of a province: Which was not governed by any Consular or Proconsular deputy, but was counted Governed under Empe∣rors, with gar∣risons lying in it. Praesidialis, and appropriate to the Caesars: as being a prouince annexed unto the Roman Empire after the division of Provinces ordained by Augustus, and had Propretors of their owne. Afterwards when as Con∣stantinus Maximus had set downe a new forme of Common-weale, under a Pre∣fect or Provost of Pretors degree of Gaule, there was set over it a vicegerent, and to∣gether with him in matters of war the Comes, heere, as much as a Lieutenant Generall. What legions served in Bri∣taine. Dio. 5. Count or Earle of Britan, an Earle or Count of the Saxony coast by Britan: and a Duke or Generall of Britan, besides Presidents, Auditors or Receivers & such others. Moreover out of those 29. Legions, which the Romans had appointed through their Imperial government, three of them lay in gar∣rison to restraine that Province, to wit, the second Legion Augusta, the sixt Legion victrix, & the twentith victrix. But this is meant of the time of Severus: For before, we learn out of Authors, that other Legions there were, and more in number. And al∣though Strabo writeth that there was neede of no more than one band of souldiers, to the keeping of Britaine in subjection, yet in the raigne of Claudius there were placed here, the second Legion Augusta, the ninth Legion Hispaniensis, & the fourteenth na∣med Gemina Martia victrix. Yea and about the time of Vespasian, Josephus sheweth, that foure Legions served in this Island: Britaine, saith hee, is compassed about with the Ocean, and almost as big as our world. The Romans there inhabiting, have brought it un∣der their dominion, and foure Legions doe keepe in subjection an Island, peopled with so great a multitude. The begin∣ning of Cities. The Roman yoke. And doubtlesse, the standing guards and Camps of Legions and Roman souldiers, were many times the Seminaries, as it were, and Seed-plots of Cities and townes, as in other provinces, so also in this our Britan. Thus was the yoke of subje∣ction laid upon the Britans, first by a garrison of souldiers, which alwaies with terror were ready to command the Inhabitants, afterwards by tribute and imposts: and in that respect forced they were to have Publicans, that is to say, greedy cormorants and horsleeches, who sucked their bloud, confiscated their goods and exacted tributes in the name of the dead: Neither were they permitted to use the ancient lawes of their country, but magistrates were sent from the people of Rome, with absolute power and commission to minister justice even in capital matters. Rowardus in Protribunal. For, Provinces had Propre∣tors, Lieutenants, Presidents, Pretors and Proconsuls. Every citie also and State had their municipall magistrates. The Pretor proclaimed yearely solemne sessions and Assizes, at which he determined the waightier causes sitting aloft upon a high Tribu∣nall seat, and guarded with his Lictors about him proudly executed he his jurisdicti∣on: rods and whipping cheere were presented to the backs, the axe and heading to the necks of the common people, and every yeare they were forced to receive one new ruler or other allotted unto them. Neither was this sufficient: they maintained discord and disscention among them, some also they favoured among the rest, that they might have them to be the instruments of this their servitude. This yoak of the Romans although it were grievous, yet comfortable it proved and a saving health unto them: for that healthsome light of Iesus Christ shone withall upon the Britans, whereof more hereafter, and the brightnesse of that most glorious Empire, chased away all savage barbarisme from the Britans minds, like as from other nations whom it had subdued. For Rome, as saith Rutilius. —Legiferis mundum complexa triumphis Foedere communi vivere cuncta facit: Compassed the world with triumphs bringing lawes; And all to live in common league doth cause. And in another place speaking unto the same Rome most truly and in right elegant verses; Fecisti patriam diversis gentibus unam. Profuit injustis te dominante capi. Dum{que} offers victis proprii consortia juris, Vrbem fecisti quod prius orbis erat. Thou hast of divers nations one entire country framed, Happy it was for lawlesse folke, that they by thee were tamed. For offering use, to them subdu'd, of thine owne proper lore, One civill state rhou mad'st of that, which was wild world before. For, to say nothing of the rest of the Provinces, the Romans having brought over Colonies hither, and reduced the naturall inhabitants of the Island unto the societie of civill life, by training them up in the liberall Arts, and by sending them into Gaule for to learne perfectly the lawes of the Romans (whereupon Juvenal Gallia causidicos docui facunda Britannos, Gaule eloquent of Britans hath good pleading lawyers made.) governed them with their lawes, and framed them to good manners and behaviour, so as in their diet and apparell they were not inferior to any other Provinces: The Roman workes in Britaine. they furni∣shed them also with goodly houses and stately buildings, in such sort, that the reliques and rubbish of their ruines doe cause the beholders now, exceedingly to admire the same: and the common sort of people doe plainely say, these Roman workes were made by Giants, whom in the North parts they use to call in their vulgar tongue Ea∣tons, for Heathens (if I be not deceived) or Ethnicks. The Picts wall. Highwaies made by the Romans. Certes, they are works of excee∣ding great admiration, and sumptuous magnificence: but especially the Picts wall, whereof I will write more in due place: and those Causeies throughout the whole land, a wonderfull piece of worke, what with dreining and drying up the meres in some places, and what with casting up banks where low vallies were, in others: so en∣sed and paved with stone, and withall of that breadth, that they can well receive and with roome enough, waines meeting one the other. Now what manner of Causeies these were, let Gallene tel you. The waies, Galen. lib. 9. cap. 8. Metho. medend. quoth he, Trajanus repaired, by paving with stone, or raising with bankes cast up such pieces of them as were moist and myrie; by stocking up and ridding such as were rough and overgrowne with bushes and briers: by making bridges over rivers that could not bee waded through: where the way seemed longer then needed, by cutting out another shorter: if any where by reason of some steepe hill, the passage were hard and uneasie, by turning it aside through easier places: now in case it were haunted with wild beasts, or lay wast and de ert, by drawing it from thence thoough places inhabited, and withall, by laying levell all uneven and rugged grounds. But now adaies these of ours, being dismembred, as it were, and cut one piece from another in some places, by reason that the country people digge out gravell from thence, and scarcely to bee seene; yet elsewhere, leading through pastures and by-grounds out of the rode way, the bankes are so high, that evidently they shew themselves. These causeies or Street-waies, the Romans called Vias Consulares, Regias, Praetorias, Militares, Publicas, cursus publicos, and Actus, as it is to be seene in Ulpian and Julius Frontinus. Ammianus Marcellinus termeth them Aggeres itinerarios & publicos: Sidonius Apollinaris, Aggeres, and Tellures inaggeratas: Beda and the latter writers, Stratas, that is Streets. Our Chronicles, doubtlesse herein deceived, doe hold, that there were but onely foure such causeies as these: of which, the first was Watling-streete, so called of one Vitellian, I wote not what he was,) who had the charge thereof (and indeed the Bri∣tans named Vitellian, in their tongue Guetalin) and Werlam-street, for that it went through Verolamium, which elsewhere also, the people dwelling neere unto it, named, High dike, High ridge, Fortie-foot-way, and Ridge-way. The second they commonly call Ikemildstreet, because it began in the Icenes country: The third, the Fosse, for that (as men thinke) it was fensed on both sides with a ditch: and the fourth Ermin-street, by a German word, of Mercurie (whom as I am informed by Iohn obsopoeus) a great learned man) under the name of Ermisul, that is, the Columne of Mercurie, the Ger∣mans our ancient progenitors, worshipped. Now, that Mercurie had the charge of waies, his name among the Greekes, may shew sufficiently: as also his Statues with foure sides, called in old time Hermae, which were set every where upon high waies. It hath been generally thought, that one Mulmutius (I know not what he should be) many hundred yeares before the birth of Christ, made these causeys: but so far am I from believing it, that I dare confident∣ly avouch, the Romans by little and little founded and raised them up. Whilest Agri∣cola, saith Tacitus, governed Britaine, severall waies were enjoyned, and farre distant places (by the purveyors commandement) that the country should carry from the nearest standing camps, or wintering places, to those that were farre off, and out of the way: And the Britans complained, as the same Tacitus writeth, That the Romans wore out, and consumed their bodies and hands, in cleering of woods, and paving the Fens, with a thou∣sand stripes & reprochfull indignities. And so we read in ancient records, That in the daies of Honorius and Arcadius, there were made in Britaine certain beaten high waies from sea to sea. That this was the Romans worke, Beda witnesseth: The Romans inhabited ( saith he ) within the wall (which, as I rehearsed before, Severus had made overthwart the Island) to∣ward the southerne side, which the Cities, Churches, and street waies there made doe wit∣nesse at this day. About the making of such causeys and high waies, the Romans were wont to exercise their souldiers, and the common multitude, lest being idle, they should grow factious, and affect alteration in the Sate. The Romans, as Isodorus wri∣teth, made Causeys in sundry places, almost through the world, both for the direction of journeys, and also because the people should not be idle: and to the making and paving of such causeys, prisoners were many times condemned, as may be gathered out of Sue∣tonius, in the life of Caius. And there are to be seene in Spaine, the Causeys called Salamantica or Argentea, as also in France certaine Rode waies, called Viae militares, paved by the Romans; to say nothing, of the way Appia, P mpeia, Valeria, and others in Italie. Sueton in Octavius. A long these Causeys and high waies, Augustus placed young men at first, as posts within small distances one from another: and afterward swift wagons, to give notice with all speed, and out of hand, what was doing in every place. Neere, or upon these Cawsies, were seated Cities and Mansions, which had in them Innes furnished with all necessaries belonging to this life for travailers, A Mansion. and way-faring persons to abide and rest in, A Mutation. as also Mutations; For so they called in that age, the places where stran∣gers, as they journied, did change their post-horses, draught beasts, or wagons. He therefore that seeketh not about these Rode waies for those places, which are men∣tioned in the Itinerarie of Antoninus, shall no doubt misse the truth, and wander out of the way. Neither, think much of your labour, in this place to note, that the Emperors erected at every miles end, along these Cawsies certaine little pillars or Columnes, with nu∣merall Characters or Letters cut in them, to signifie how many miles: Whereupon Sidonius Apollinaris, writeth thus : Antiquus tibi nec teratur agger; Cujus per spatium satis vetustis, Nomen Caesareum viret columnis. That ancient cawsey, doe not decay, Where on good old pillars along the way, The Caesars name stands fresh for aie. Neere also unto these high waies, Varr. lib. de lingua Latin. on both sides were Tombs and Sepulchers, with Inscriptions graved upon them in memoriall of brave and noble men, that the passen∣gers by, might be put in mind, that as those sometimes were mortall men, so them∣selves are now. For the repairing likewise of the said cawseys, as wee may see in the Code of Theodosius title, Codex Theo∣dosij. The Lawes S. Edward. de Itinere muniendo, that is, Of making and mending waies, They all were willing upon a good and profitable devotion, who could doe best, and make most speed in this businesse. Furthermore, in our owne ancient lawes, there is mention made, de pace quatuor Cheminorum, that is, Viar m sub majori judicio, that is, Touching the peace of the foure Rhode-waies in some higher Court. Under the raigne of Nerva, Nerva Trajanus. the writers have discontinued the Storie of Britannie. But in the time of Trajane, the Britans may seem to have revolted and rebelled: and evident it is out of Spartianus, Adrianus, Emperour. Jul. Severus, Propraetor▪ that subdued then they were. Moreover, while Adrian was Emperour, Julius Severus ruled the Island: and when he was called away against the Jewes, who then were in an uprore, the Britans could not have beene kept in their allegiance to the Romans, had not Adrianus come among them in person: who be∣ing then Consull the third time, in the yeare of Christ 124. seemeth by the prow∣esse of his armie to have discomfited his enemies. For I have seene in one piece of mony of his coining, the stampe of an Emperour with three souldiers, whom I judge to represent three Legions, with this Inscription, EXER. BRITANNICUS: and another bearing this Inscription RESTITUTOR BRITANNY. This Prince reformed many things throughout the Island: and was the first that built a wall between the barbarous Britans, Spartianu . and the Romans fourescore miles in length: laying the foundation thereof within the ground of huge piles or stakes, and fastning them together, in manner of a strong hedge or mound. For which expedition of his, Florus the Poet plaied upon him, thus: Ego nolo Caesar esse Ambulare per Britannos, Scythicas pati pruinas. I will in no wise Caesar be, To walke along in Britanie The Scythicke frosts to feele and see. Unto whom, Adrianus wrote back in this wise: Ego nolo Florus esse, Ambulare per tabernas, Latitare per popinas, Culices pati rotundos. And I will never Florus be, To walke from shop to shop, as he; To l rke in Tavernes secretly, And there to feele the round wine fly. Cl. Priscus Li∣cinius, Propre∣tor of Britan∣nie. At this time M.F. CL. PRISCVS LICINIVS, was the Propraetor of Bri∣tannie, and emploied in the Journey of Jurie with Hadrian; as appeareth by this an∣tique Inscription in a broken marble. M.F. CL. PRISCO. ICINIO. ITALICO. LEGATO. AVGVSTORVM PR. PR. PROV. CAPPADOCIAE PR. PR. PROV. BRITANNIAE LEG. AVG. — — — LEG. IIII. GALLICIAE. PRAEF. COH. IIII. LINGONVM. VEXILLO. MIL. ORNATO. A. DIVO. HADRIANO. IN EXPEDITIONE IVDAIC. Q. CASSIVS. DOMITIVS. PALVMB VS. Antoninus Pi∣us, Emperor. Under Antoninus Pius (by whose ordinance as many as were in the Roman world, became Citizens of Rome) this warre brake out againe into a light fire, which hee so quenched by driving the barbarous Britans further off, under the conduct of Lollius Vrbicus Lieutenant, Lollius Vrbi∣cus Propretor. Capitolinus. Pausanius in Arcadicis. and by making another wall of turfe, that thereupon he was sur∣named BRITANNICUS: and hee deserved singular commendation, for that hee had fined the Brigates with the losse of one part of their Lands, who had infested with roades Genounia, a neighbour province under the protection and allegiance of the Romans. And at this time, as we collect out of Jabolenus, Sejus Saturnius was Ar∣chigubernus of the Navie in Britannie: Digest. lib. 36. Archiguber∣nus. But whether by this title, hee were an Admi∣rall of the said Navie, or a principall Pilot, or the Master of a ship, I would have the Lawyers to tell. Antoninus Philosophus, Emperor. Calphurnius Agricola, Propretor. But the Britans, giving occasions still of quarrels and warres, one after another be∣gan a commotion under Antoninus Philosophus: for the appeasing whereof, Calphur∣nius Agricola was sent, and seemeth to have ended the same with fortunate successe. Which commendation for the dispatching of this warre, Fronto, for Roman eloquence com∣parable to the best, and second to none, would needs give unto Antoninus the Emperour. For albeit he sitting still, and holding his Court in the very palace of Rome, gave out only his com∣mission and warrant for to make this warre, yet he protesteth, that like unto the Pilot sitting at the helme to steere a galley, Eumenius Capitolinus. he deserved the glory of the whole course and sailing in that voy∣age. At the same time there served also in the wars of Britannie, Helvius Pertinax brought hither out of the Parthian warre, and here staied. Commodus Emperor. Whiles Commodus was Emperour, Britannie, was all of a Garboile, full of warres, and seditious troubles. For the barbarous Britans, having passed over the wall, made great waste, and hewed in pieces the Romans, both Captaine and Souldier. For the repressing of which rebels, Vlpius Mar∣cellus Propre∣tor. Vlpius Marcellus was sent: who had so fortunate an hand in taming their audacious stomacks, that his prowesse was soone defaced, and depra∣ved with envie, and himselfe called backe. This Captaine was of all others most vigilant: and being desirous that the rest about him might be as watchfull, Xiphilinus out of Dio. he wrote every evening xij. tables throughout, such as commonly are made of the Linden-tree wood: and commanded one of his attendants about him, to carry the same unto divers of the souldiers, some at one houre of the night, and some at another, whereby they might thinke their Generall was ever awake, and so themselves might sleepe the lesse. Of whose temperance thus much also is reported: And albeit otherwise his nature was able to resist sleepe, yet that he might doe it the better, he brought to passe by fasting and ab∣stinence. For to the end that he would not feed of bread to the full, hee caused it to be brought from Rome to him into the campe; that by reason of the stalenesse of it, hee could not eat any whit more than was needfull. But when he, I say, was called backe, all licentious wan∣tonnesse brake into the Campe, and the forces in Britanny, letting the raines loose of militarie discipline, became unruly, and refused the command & government of Com∣modus, although by some of his flatterers he was stiled Britannicus. Moreover, they that served in Britanny suborned and sent a thousand and five hundred of their owne ranke into Italy against Perrennius, a man that not onely carried an outward shew and countenance, but of all the Emperors minions could indeed do most with him: accu∣sing him that he had made captaines over souldiers certain of the gentlemens degree, and put Senators out of place, and withall, that he had laid wait to take away the Em∣perors life. Commodus gave eare to this information, and believed it, whereupon he delivered the man into their hands: who after he had with many indignities beene whipped, Helvius Per∣tinax Propre∣tor. lost his head, and was proclaimed a traitor to his country. Howbeit these seditious stirs Helvius Pertinax repressed, not without great danger, being himselfe al∣most slaine, and for certaine, left for dead among those that were slaine. Now when Britanny was in peaceable estate, Clodius Albi∣nus Propretor Capitolinus. Junius Severu Propretor. Christian Re∣ligion in Bri∣tanny. K. Lucius. Clodius Albinus received it from Commodus, and withall, afterwards for his worthy exploits in Britanny the name of Caesareus: but soone after, because in a publike assembly he had made an invective a∣gainst the government of the Emperors, Junius Severus was placed in his rome. At which very time, the thicke mists of superstition being scattered (not under M. Aurelius and L. Verus Emperors, as Beda writeth but under Commodus, when Eleu∣therus was Bishop of Rome) the heavenly light & brightnesse of Christianitie, by the meanes of King Lucius shone upon this Island. Which Prince, (as we find in the anci∣ent Mattyrol ∣giis. reports and lives of Martyrs, usually read in the Church) admiring the integritie and holy life of the Christians, made petition unto Eleutherus the Pope, by the me∣diation of Elvan & Meduan, two Britans, that both himselfe and his subjects might be instructed in christian religion. Then sent he hither forthwith, Fugatius and Donaita∣nus, two holy men, with letters, which at this day be extant, & (as very many are per∣swaded) are not forged but authenticall, as bearing date, when L. Aurelius Commo∣dus was second time Consull with Vespronius: Which holy men instructed the King and others in the mysteries of christian religion. Hereupon it is, that Ninnius writeth thus of this King, King Lucius quoth he, is surnamed Lever Maur, that is, [a Prince] of great glory, for the Faith which in his time came. Now for those that call these matters of King Lucius into question (as many doe in these daies) as if there had beene at that time no King in Britanny, which they suppose was full and whole reduced into a pro∣vince before, I wish them to call to remembrance thus much, That the Romans by ancient custome had in their provinces Kings as the instruments of bondage; that the Britans even then, refused to obey Commodus; and that themselves possessed and held freely, those parts of the Island which were beyond the foresaid wall, had their Kings of their owne, Capitolinus. and that Antoninus Pius a few yeares before, having ended warre, permitted Kingdomes to by ruled by their own Kings, and provinces by their own Lieutenants Generall, or Governors. Against the Jewes. cap. 7. Comites. What should let then, but that Lucius might be King over that part of the Island, un∣to which the Romans forces never came? And verily, that which Tertullian hath put downe, who wrote much about those daies, if we throughly weigh his words, and the time, may very aptly be referred to the Britans conversion unto Christ: Those pla∣ces, quoth he, among the Britans, which yielded the Romans no accesse, are now subdued unto Christ: and somewhat after, Britanny is enclosed within the compasse of the Ocean. The nation of the Mauri, and the barbarous Getulians are beset by the Romans, for feare they might passe beyond the limits of their countries. What should I speake of the Romans, who with garrisons of their Legions fortifie their Empire? neither are they able to extend the power of their dominion, beyond those very nations. But the Kingdome and name of Christ reacheth farther still, it is believed in every place, and is worshipped of all those people above named, &c. But our Ecclesiasticall writers who have emploied both time and diligence in the consideration of this point endeavor and labour to prove, and that out of ancient au∣thors of credit, that before this time, in the very dawning and infancie of the Church, Britanny had received christian religion: and namely that Joseph of Arimathea a no∣ble Senator, Bale. Matthew Parker, John Fox. sailed out of Gaule into Britanny, and that Claudia Rufina the wife of Aulus Pudens, which woman, as it is credibly thought, S. Paul nameth in his latter E∣pistle to Timothy, and whom the Poet Martiall so highly commendeth, was a Britan borne. They cite also the testimony of Dorotheus, who commonly goeth under the name of the Bishop of Tyre, who in his Synopsis hath recorded, that Simon Zelotes, after he had travailed through Mauritania, was at last slaine and buried in Britanny: as also that Aristobulus, whom S. Paul mentioneth in his Epistle to the Romans, was made Bishop of Britanny: (whereto Nicephorus inclineth) notwithstanding he spea∣keth of Britiana and not of Britannia: Brutij in Italy. they report likewise upon the authoritie of Si∣meon that great Metaphrast, and of the Greeks The same that Calen∣dar or Alma∣nack with us. Menology, that S. Peter came hither and spread abroad the light of Gods word: out of Sophronius also and Theodoret that S. Paul after his second imprisonment in Rome, visited this our country. Where∣upon Venantius Fortunatus if he may be beleeved as a Poet, writeth thus of him, un∣lesse he speaketh of his doctrine. Transiit Oceanum, & quà facit Insula portum Quas{que} Britannus habet terras, quas{que} ultima Thule. Pass'd over Seas, where any Isle makes either port or bay, And lands, so far as Britans coast or cape of Thule lay. But to this purpose maketh especially that which erewhile I alleaged out of Tertulli∣an; as also that which Origen recordeth, How the Britans with one consent embraced the Faith, and made way themselves unto God by meanes of the Druidae, who alwaies did beat upon this article of beliefe, 4. Vpon Eze∣chiel. That there was but one God. And verily of great moment and importance is that with me, that Gildas writeth, after hee had mentioned the rebelli∣on of Boodicia, Vnder Nero. and treated of the revenge thereof, Meane while, quoth he, Christ, that true Sun, shining with his most glittering brightnesse upon the universall world, not from the temporall skie and firmament, but even from the highest cope of heaven, exceeding all times, vouchsafed first, his beames, that is to say, his precepts and doctrine in the time as wee know of Tiberius Caesar, unto this frozen Island full of Ice, and lying out as it were in a long tract of earth remote from the visible sunne. Chrysostome likewise, (to note so much by the way) writeth of the Christian religion in this Iland, as followeth: The British Ilands seated without this sea, and within the very Ocean, have felt the power of the word (for even there also be Churches founded, and altars erected) of that word, I say, which is planted in the soules, and now also in the lips of all people. And the same Chrysostome in another place: In a Sermon upon the Pentecost. Epitaph, of Marcella, Widow. How often have folke in Britanny fed of mans flesh? but now with fasting they refresh the soule. Likewise S. Hierome ; The Britan divided from our world, if he proceed in reli∣gion, leaving the westerne parts toward the Suns setting, will seeke Hierusalem, a Citie known unto him by fame only, and relation of scriptures. But now passe we forward from the Church to the Empire. When Commodus was slaine, Pertinax being called to the Empire, sent presently Albinus againe over into Britanny. But after that Pertinax within eight hundred and two daies was made away, Pertinax Em∣perour. Severus Em∣perour. Didius Iulianus, (who likewise was within a while killed) at Rome, Pescennius Niger in Syria, Clodius Albinus in Britanny, and Septimius Se∣verus in Pannonia, all together at once take upon them the soverainty of the Empire. Severus being next unto Rome, hastneth first to Rome, and, with consent of the soul∣diers and Senate, proclaimed Emperor, straightwaies (because he would not leave an enemie behind at his backe) craftily createth Albinus, Albinus Em∣perour. Caesar: this Albinus, chiefe commander of the forces in Britanny and Gaule, and having stamped mony with his image upon it, set up his statutes, and conferred upon him the honorable dignitie of a Consull, wisely with good foresight dulceth and kindly intreateth the men. Then maketh he an expedition into the East against Niger, whom in plaine field hee gave battell unto, vanquished and slew. The City Afterwards Constantino∣ple. Bizantium after 3. yeares siege he for∣ced and wonne: the Adiabenes, Arabians and other nations hee brought to his sub∣jection. Being now puffed up with pride, for these fortunate victories, and impatient of a companion in government, he sent under-hand murderers of purpose to dispatch Albinus: but seeing his secret practises tooke not effect, hee openly proclaimeth him Traitor, and an enemie to the State, and with all the speede he could make, hasteneth into Gaule against him: where Albinus with the choice and chiefe strength of the British armie made head neere unto Lugdunum. Lyons. The Albinians fought most valiantly, in so much as Severus himselfe, throwing from him his purple robe, began with his men to flie. But when the said British forces, as if now the victorie had beene in their hands, displaied their rankes in thinner arraies, and ran furiously upon their enemies backs, discomfited and in rout, Laetus, one of Severus his Captaines, who with his fresh and unfoiled troupes, waited untill then, for to see the issue of the battell (ha∣ving heard withall that Severus was slaine) with a purpose and resolution now to take the Empire upon him, charged upon them, and put them to flight. And Seve∣rus, having by this time rallied his men, and resumed the purple Roabe aforesaid, fol∣lowed likewise fiercely upon them, and having slain Albinus with a number of other, obtained a most fortunate victorie. Upon this, Severus (having alone the Soveraigntie of the whole world) sent first Heraclianus to seize upon Britaine, Herculianus▪ Propraetor. Virius Lupus, Propraetor. Digest. lib. 28. Tit. 6. Who inhabi∣ted the coun∣ttey now Northumber∣land. and to rule it: when Virius Lupus, as Propraetor and Lieutenant ( whom Vlpian the Civill Lawyer nameth Praesident of Britaine) who, as we shall relate in place convenient, built many new Castles there: howbeit, dri∣ven hee was in the end to redeeme his owne peace, at the hands of the Maeatae, with a great summe of money, after hee had recovered some few prisoners, considering that the Caledonians kept not their word, who had promised to keepe under the said Maeatae. And being not able after many losses and calamities sustained, to represse the sudden rodes, and assaults made by the enemies, of necessitie hee sent for Seve∣rus himselfe: who gladly and thankefully taking hold of this good occasion, to with∣draw and weane his sonnes (given to licentious rioting) from the delightsome plea∣sures of Rome-Citie, and therewith to augment his owne stile with the addition of Britannicus: albeit, he was above threescore yeares of age, and gowtie besides, fully resolveth with his two sons, Bassianus (whom he had named Antoninus, & Augustus) Geta Caesar, and the Legions, to enter Britaine. The Britans forthwith sent Em∣bassadours unto him for peace. Whom after he had of purpose detained with him a good while, till he might prepare all things meet for warre, hee sent away, as they came without obtaining their suit: and leaving his sonne Geta, (whom hee created Augustus at his first arrivall in Britaine) in the hither part of the Province which con∣tinued in obedience to the Romans, for the civill jurisdiction and administration of the affaires there: himselfe with Antoninus went into the farther parts, where being occupied in cutting down woods, making bridges, and drying up the meres, he fought no battell: howbeit, what with the ambuscadoes of enemies, and what with sick∣nesse, hee lost fiftie thousand of his men: Thus writeth Dio. But Herodian hath re∣corded, that in certaine light skirmishes, whiles the barbarous Britaines kept the fen∣nie bogs, and most thick woods, out of which they might more safely assaile the Ro∣mans he had the upper-hand. Yet he enforced them in the end to a league, with this condition, that they should yield unto him a good part of their Countrey. And that which is the greatest honour and ornament of his Empire, he fensed it with a wall o∣ver thwart the Island, from one coast of the Ocean to another. For these victories, he stamped certaine pieces of money with this Inscription, VICTORIA BRITANNICA, assumed the surname of BRITANNICVS MAXIMVS; and his sonne Geta named Bri∣tannicus bare it, as appeareth by his coines. Howbeit, the Britans afterward (having broken covenant) began to rebell, and make alteration in the State, whereupon his wrathfull indignation against them brake out into such termes, as that in an assembly of his souldiers, he gave them in charge to make a generall massacre of them all, using these verses out of Homer, to this effect : Let none escape your bloudy hands, but be they sure to die, Spare not the very babes unborne, in mothers wombe that lie. These rebels when he had in some sort repressed by the helpe of his own forces, he sickned, not so much upon any bodily disease, as for griefe and sorrow of mind, occa∣sioned by the desperate and unreclaimable misdemeanour of his Sonne Antoninus, who once or twice gave the attempt to kill him with his owne hand, and so hee yiel∣ded up his vitall breath at Yorke, uttering at the point of death these his last words, A troubled state of Common weale I found in every place: but, I leave it now in peace and quietnesse, even among the Britans. His body here was in militarie sort carried forth by his souldiers, bestowed in a funerall fire, and honoured with a solemne justing, and running at Tilt, performed by his owne souldiers and sonnes. I might peradven∣ture be censured for my vanitie, if I should relate in this place the prodigies that went before his death, and namely, as touching the sootie and black hostes or Sacrifices, as also the coronet made of the deadly and mournefull cypresse, which a scurrile Buf∣fon and jester presented unto him with these words, Thou hast beene all, now be a God: but after what manner he was canonized a God, I will not thinke much of mine owne paine, to annex hereunto, considering that the knowledge thereof may delight the reader also. The Apothe∣osis, or Dei∣fication of the Emperour. A Custome the Romanes have, to consecrate those Emperours that die, their Sonnes or Successours surviving. And whosoever are in this wise honoured, be canonized and regi∣stred in the Rolle of their Divi, that is, Gods. Now, during this complement, they hold a generall mourning thorow the whole citie, and the same mixed with a festivall solemnitie. For, Herodian. after the Princes death, they burie the bodie honourably, and with sumptuous funerals, according to the manner of other men: But withall, they frame an image of waxe, resem∣bling in all points the party deceased, and lay the same openly at the entry of the palace, upon a most ample and stately bed of Ivorie, erected on high, and covered with cloth of gold. And verily, that image lieth with a palish and wan colour like unto a sicke man: About the bed on both sides, there sit a great part of the day, the whole bodie of the Senate on the right hand, arraied in their blacks: and on the left hand certaine Dames and Ladies, who are by the place and dignity of the husbands, or parents worshipfull. And there is not one of them seene to weare any gold about them, nor to be adorned with jewels, but clad in white and slen∣der garments, they represent mourners. This do they for seven daies together: during which time▪ the Physitians resort daily into him to touch his pulse, and consider of his disease, and thereupon as of their patient, judicially pronounce, that he groweth worse and worse. Thus after a sevenight, when it seemed that he was departed, certaine of the noblest, and most choice young gentlemen, as wel of the Senators as Knights degree, take up the foresaid bed upon their shoulders, and carrie it thorow the high street, called Sacra, into the old Forum, where the Roman Magistrates had wont to lay down their rule and government. Here, on both sides were certaine greeses or steps in maner of staires raised; upon which, on the one hand was pla∣ced a quire of boies of noblest birth, and of the Patritian degree, and on the other, a company of women likewise of noble parentage, singing in commendation of the dead Prince, hymmes and sonets, entuned in a solemne, and mournfull note. Which done, they take up the said bed or hearse againe, and carrie it out of the Citie into Campus Martius: where, in the broadest place of the said field, a frame or turret foure square with equall sides was raised, and the same made in manner of a tabernacle, of no other matter than main great pieces of timber. And ve∣rily within it was all over filled with dry fewell: but without, adorned with rich hangings woven with gold wire between, with divers jvory portraicts of imagerie, and sundry curi∣ous pictures. . Over this frame there stood another somewhat lesse: howbeit, in forme and furniture very like unto the former, with windowes and dores standing open. And so a third and fourth turret, smaller every one than that next beneath it, and others likewise still one after another, untill you come to the last and utmost, which is the least and highest of all the rest. The manner of this whole building a man may well compare to these lanternes or light-towers standing by haven ides, and are commonly called Phari, which give light by fire in the night time, and direct ships at sea in their course to safe harbours. The hearse then being mounted up into the second tabernacle, they get together spices and odours of all sorts, likewise all the sweet smelling fruits, hearbs juices and liquors, that the whole world can yield, and thereon poure the same forth by heape-meale. For their is not a nation, citie or state, nor any person of worth and marke above the rest, but strive a vie every one to bestow in honor of the Prince, those last gifts and presents. Now when there is a mightie heape of the said spiceries gotten together, so that the whole roome is filled therewith, then all the Gentlemen of the Knights order, first ride about that edifice, marching in a certaine measure: and there∣with in their courses and recourses observe a warlike kind of motion round, in just measure and number. The open chariots likewise are driven about by courtiers in purple roabes of honor sitting thereupon to guide and direct them with vizards on their faces resembling all the redoubted captaines and renowned Emperors of Rome. These ceremonies thus performed, the Prince that next succeedeth in the Empire, takes a torch, and first himselfe sets it to the tabernacle aforesaid: then, all the rest from every side put fire under, so that forthwith every place being full of the said dry fuell and odors, kindle and catch fire mightily. Then straightwaies from the high∣est and least tabernacle, as it were out of some lower or high turret together with the fire put underneath, an Eagle was let flie, and the same was supposed to carry up the Princes soule into heaven. And so from that time forward was the Emperor reputed and by the Romans adored among the rest of the Gods. Thus much by way of di∣gression and beside the matter: now let us returne. Antoninus Caracalla the sonne of Severus, Antoninus Caracalla. pursued the reliques of the war by his Captaines for a while in Britaine: but soone after he made peace, surrendring to the enemie their territories and castles. Howbeit in a spirit of ambition hee assumed to himselfe in his stile the name of BRITANNICVS, yea and of BRITANNICVS MAXI∣MVS. His brother Geta likewise, took upon him the title and addition of BRITANNI∣CVS. For we have seen his mony coined with this Inscription, IMP. CAES. P. SEPT. GETAPIVS. AVG. BRIT. PONTIF. TRI. P. III. COS. II. PP. From this time forward, Nonius Phi∣lippus Propr tor. writers have in long silence passed over the affaires of Bri∣taine: For Alexander Severus was not slaine, as some would have it, in Sicila a town of Britaine, but in Gaule. This certaine evidence onely have wee out of an antique stone, that Nonnius Philippus was here Propretor under Gordianus the yonger. Whiles Gallienus the Emperor gave himselfe over to all manner of riotousnesse, the State of Rome either through the carelesse managing of affaires, Gallienus Emperour. or by some incli∣nation of the Destinies lay dismembred as it were, and maimed in all parts: and a hea∣vie rent there was and revolt of this Province from the Roman Captaine. Panegyrick unto Con∣stantius. Thirty Ty∣rants. For thirty tyrants there were who in divers places usurped rule and dominion: among whom Lollianus Victorinus, Posthumus, the Tetrici and Marius bare soveraigne sway, as I suppose, in this Island: For their coines are here in great abundance digged up daily. Under Aurelian, that notable bibber Bonosus, Bonosus. a Britan borne entred upon the Em∣pire together with Proculus, who claimed to himselfe all Britaine, Spaine, and Now, La ¦guedoc Pro∣vance and Daulphine. Brac∣cata Gallia, which provinces Florianus had for two moneths governed, but being in a long and bloudy battell vanquished by Probus, he hanged himselfe, whereupon this jest went commonly on him, There hangs a tankard, and not a man. Howbeit Probus was welcommed into Britaine with new troubles and commoti∣ons: For one, Probus Em¦peror. Zosimus. whom Probus himselfe, induced by the commendation of his familiar friend Victorinus Maurus, had promoted to an office of state, practised a revolt. For which he fell out by way of expostulation with Victorinus, who having gotten leave to depart unto the said party, and feining that he fled and was escaped from the Em∣peror, being kindly entertained of the tyrant slue him in the night and returned to Probus, and therewith was the province rid of these broiles. But who this tyrant was no man hath related: Laelianus Emperor. Burgundia and Vanda in Britaine Howbeit, he may seeme to be that Cl. Corn. Laelianus, whose pieces of coine are found in this Island, and not elsewhere. Moreover, Probus sent hi∣ther the Burgundians and Vandals whom he had subdued, and granted them places to inhabit: who afterwards, so often as any one went about to raise sedition, stood the Romans in good stead. Now, whereas Vopiscus writeth, that Probus permitted the Britans to have vines, there is a right learned man that feareth lest hee have inconsi∣deratly put this down in writing, as if this land were unfit for vineyards: & yet it hath vines, and for certain it is knowne, that it had very many. In regard of so many tyrants rising up in these daies within this Province, Hierome. Carus and Carinus Em∣perours. Porphyrie, who lived in this age, cried out in these termes, Britaine a fertile Province of tyrants. After this, Carus Augustus the Emperor allotted by decree this our country, to∣gether with Gaule, Spaine and Illyricum unto his son Carinus. That he warred here, some there be that slightly indeed, but how truly I wot not, gather out of these ver∣ses of Nemesianus; Nec taceam quae nuper bella sub Arcto, Foelici Carine manu confeceris, ipso Pene prior genitore Deo: Neither may I the wars in silence hide Dispatcht of late with happy hand in North, By thee, Carine, thy Father Deifi'd, Who dost well nere surpasse in works of worth. Under Dioclesian, Carausius a Menapian borne, a man of very base parentage, how∣beit inventive and active withall, who for his valour shewed in battels at sea became renowned, was ordained Captaine of Dioclesian and Maximi∣an Emperors. Bononium Galliae. Bologne in Gaule to put backe and drive away the Saxons and Frankners that troubled the seas. This Carausius having at first from time to time taken many of the Barbarians prisoners, and yet neither brought in all the bootie and pillage into the Emperors treasury, nor made restitution of goods unto the Provincials: afterwards when as hee vanquished and subdued but few of them, began deepely to be suspected, that of set purpose he admitted the Barbarians to enter, to the end in their passage by he might intercept them with booty, and so by this oc∣casion enrich himselfe: whereupon Maximian Augustus the Emperour gave com∣mandement that he should be killed. Carausius Emperour. Whereof he having certaine intelligence, tooke upon him the Imperiall ensignes, and seized Britan into his own hands, withdrew the Navy that lay in defence of Gaule, built many ships after the Roman manner, adjoy∣ned to himselfe the Roman Legion, kept out the companies of forreine souldiers, as∣sembled and drew together the French Merchants to muster, fortified Bologne with a garrison, conveied away, and tooke to his owne use the publike revenewes of Britan and Batavia, allured by the spoiles of whole provinces no small power of Barbarian forces to be his associates, and the Franks especially, whom he trained to sea-service, and in one word, made all the sea coasts every way dangerous for passage. To the vanquishing of him, Maximianus set forward with a puissant army, out of which The The∣bane Legion. som there were who in the very voyage suffered death gloriously for Christs sake: but when he was come to the sea-side, being skared partly for want of sea-souldiers, and partly with the rage of the British Ocean, staied there; and having made a fained peace with Carausius, yielded unto him the rule of the Island, considering he was ta∣ken to bee the meeter man, both to command, and also to defend the Inhabitants a∣gainst the warlike nations. Hereupon it is, that wee have seene in the silver coines of Carausius two Emperours joyning hands, with this circumscription, CONCORDIA AVG. G. But Maximian turned his forces upon the Frankners, who then held Of the Au∣gusti, that is Emperors. Batavia, and had secretly under hand sent aide unto Carausius: whom he surprized on such a sudden, Now Hol∣land. that he forced them to submission. In this meane while, Carausius governed Britain with incorrupt and unstained reputation, and in exceeding great peace: a∣gainst the Barbarians, as writeth Ninnius the disciple of Elvodugus, hee reedified the wall betweene the mouthes of Cluda and Carunus, and fortified the same with 7. castles, and built a round house of polished stone upon the banke of the river Carun, which tooke name of him, erecting therewith a triumphall arch in remembrance of victory. Howbeit Bucha∣nan thinketh verily it was the Temple of Terminus, as we will write in Scotland. When Dioclesian and Maximian, as well to keepe that which was won, as to reco∣ver what was lost, had taken to them Constantius Chlorus, and Maximianus Galerius to bee Caesars: Constantius having levied and enrolled an armie, came with great speed, and sooner then all men thought to Bologne in France, which also is called Gessoriacum, a towne that Carausius had fortified with strong garrison; and they laid siege unto it round about: by pitching logs fast into the earth at the very entry, and piling huge stones one upon another in manner of a rampire, he excluded the sea, and tooke from the towne the benefit of their haven: which damme, the strong and violent current of the Ocean beating against it forcibly for many daies together, could not breake, and beare downe: no sooner was the place yielded, but the first tide that rose made such a breach into the said rampire that it was wholly dis-joyned, and broken in sunder. The Panegy∣rick of Eume∣nius. And whiles he rigged and prepared both heere and elsewhere an Armada for the recoverie of Britaine, he rid Batavia which was held by the Francks, from all enemies, and translated many of them into the Roman nations, for to till their waste and desert territories. In this meane time Allectus a familiar friend of Carausius, who under him had the government of the State, C. Allectus, Emperour. slew him by a treacherous wile, and put upon himselfe the Imperiall purple roabe. Which when Constantius heard▪ he having manned & armed divers fleets, drave Allectus to such doubtfull termes, as being altogether void of counsell, and to seek what to doe, he found then, and never before, that he was not fen∣ced with the Ocean, but enclosed within it. And withall, hoyzing up saile in a tempe∣stuous weather, and troubled sea, by meanes of a mist which over-spread the sea, hee passed by the enemies fleet unawares to them, which was placed at the Isle of Wight, in espiall and ambush to discoved, and intercept him: and no sooner were his forces landed upon the coast of Britaine, but he set all his owne ships on fire, that his Soul∣diers might repose no trust in saving themselves by flight. Allectus himselfe, when he espied the Navy of Constantius under saile, & approaching toward him, forsooke the sea-side, which he kept, and as he fled, lighted upon Asclepiodotus Grand Seneschal of the Praetorium: but in so fearful a fit, & like a mad man, he hastned his own death, that he neither put his footmen in battell ray, nor marshalled those troopes which he drew along with him in good order, but casting off his purple garment, that he might not be knowne, rushed in with the mercenary Barbarians, and so in a tumultuary skirmish was slaine, and hardly by the discovery of one man found among the dead carcases of the Barbarians, which lay thick spread every where over all the plaines and hils. But the Frankners, and others of the barbarous souldiers, which remained alive after the battell, thought to sacke London, and to take their flight and be gone: at which very instant, as good hap was, the souldiers of Constantius, which by reason of a misty and foggy aire, were severed from the rest, came to London, and made a slaugh∣ter of them in all places throughout the citie, and procured not only safetie to the citi∣zens in the execution of their enemies, but also a pleasure in the sight thereof. By this victory was the Province recovered, after it had beene, by usurpation, held seven yeares or there about, under Carausius, and three under Allectus. Whereup∣on Eumenius unto Constantius, writeth thus; O brave victorie of much importance, and great consequence; yea, and worthy of manifold triumphs, whereby Britaine is resto∣red, whereby the nation of the Frankners is utterly destroyed, and whereby upon many peo∣ple beside, found accessarie to that wicked conspiracie, there is imposed a necessitie of obedi∣ence, and allegiance, and in one word, whereby, for assurance of perpetuall quietnesse, the seas are scoured and cleansed. And as for thee, ô invincible Caesar, make thy boast and spare not, that thou hast found out a new world, and by restoring unto the Roman puissance, their glorie for prowesse at sea, hast augmented the Empire with an element, greater than all Lands. And a little after, unto the same Constantius: Britaine is recovered so, as that those nations also which adjoyne unto the bounds of the same Island, become obedient to your will and pleasure. In the last yeares of Dioclesian and Maximian, when as the East Church had beene for many years already polluted with the bloud of martyrs, the violence of that furi∣ous persecution went on, and passed even hither also into the West, and many Christi∣ans suffered martyrdome. Among whom, the principall were Persecution in Britaine. Albanus of S. Alban. Uerlam; Julius and Aaron of Isca, a citie called otherwise Neere Saint Albans in Monmouth shire. Caër Leon, &c. of whom I will write in their proper place. For then the Church obtained victorie with most honourable, and happy triumph, when as with ten yeares massacres it could not be vanquished. When Dioclesian and Maximinian gave over their Empire, they elected that Con∣stantius Chlorus for Emperour, Constantius Chlorus, Emperour. who untill that time had ruled the State, under the title of Caesar: and to him befell Italie, Africke, Spaine, France, and Britaine: but Italy and Africke became the Provinces of Galerius; and Constantius stood con∣tented with the rest. This Constantius, what time as hee served in Britaine under Aurelian, tooke to wife Helena daughter of Coelus, or Coelius a British Prince, on whom he begat that noble Constantine the Great, Baronius, in his Ecclesia∣sticall History. in Britaine. For so, together with that great Historiographer Baronius, the common opinion of all other writers with one consent, beareth witnesse: unlesse it be one or two Greeke authors of late time, and those dissenting one from the other, and a right learned man, grounding upon a corrupt place of Iul. Firmicus. Howbeit, compelled he was by Maximian to put her away, Helena. for to mary Theodora his daughter. This is that Helena, which in antike In∣scription is called Venerable, and right de∣vout Empresse. VENERABILIS and PIISSIMA AVGVSTA, and for Christian pie∣ty, for clensing Ierusalem of Idols, for building a goodly Church in the place where our Lord suffered, and for finding the Saving Crosse of Christ, is so highly commen∣ded of Ecclesiasticall writers. And yet both Iewes and Gentiles termed her by way of ignominy and reproach Inne keeper or Hostesse. Stabularia; because shee (a most godly Princesse) sought out the crib or manger wherein Christ was borne, and in the place where stood that hostelry, Of the death of Theodo∣sius. founded a Church. Hereupon S. Ambrose: They say that this Lady was at first an Inholder or Hostesse, &c. Well, this good hostesse Helena, hastned to Ierusalem and sought out the place of our Lords passion, and made so diligent search for the Lords crib: This good hostesse was not ignorant of that host, which cured the wayfaring mans hurts that was woun∣ded by theeves: This good hostesse chose to be reputed a dung-farmer, that she might thereby g ine Christ. Eusebius. And verily no lesse praise and commendation goeth of her husband Con∣stantius for his piety and moderation ; A man, who having utterly rejected the superstiti∣on of the ungodly, in worshipping divers gods, willingly of himselfe acknowledged one God, the Ruler of all things. Whereupon, to try the faith and beleefe in God of his owne Courtiers, hee put it to their free choice, either to sacrifice unto those gods, and so to stay with him, or els to refuse and depart: But those that would depart rather than re∣nounce and forsake their faith to God, hee kept with him still: casting off all the rest, who he supposed would prove disloiall unto him, seeing they had abandoned their be∣leefe in the true God. This most noble and worthy Emperor, in his last British expe∣dition against the Those in Albanie, in the North of Scotland. Caledonians and the Picts died at Yorke, leaving behind him his sonne Constantine Emperor, his successor and Caesar elect. Some few daies before the death of Constantius, his sonne Constantius rode from Rome to Yorke on post horses: and the rest which were kept at the charges of the State, See Suidas, why he was called Poore. hee maimed and lamed all the way as hee went, because no man should pursue him, and there he received his fathers last breath. Whereupon an ancient O∣rator spake thus unto him : Thou entredst this sacred place not as a competitor of the Em∣pire, but as heire apparant and ordained already, Constantine the Great, Emperour. and forthwith that fathers house of thine saw thee, the lawfull successor. For, there was no doubt but that the inheritance duly be∣longed unto him, whom the destinies had ordained the first begotten sonne unto the Empe∣ror. Yet for all that, constrained in maner by the souldiers, and especially by the meanes of Erocus King of the Almanes, (who by way of aid accompanied him) advanced hee was to the Imperiall dignity. Panegyrick oration unto Constantine the Great. The souldiers regarding rather the publike good of the common-wealth, than following his affections, invested him in the purple roabe, wee∣ping and setting spurs to his horse, because hee would avoid the endeavor of the armie that called so instantly upon him, &c: but the felicity of the common-wealth over∣came his modesty. And hereof it is, that the Panegyrist crieth out in these words ; O fortunate Britaine and more happy now than all other lands, that hast the first sight of Constan∣tine Caesar! And now Caesar at his very entrance, having first pursued the reliques of that war, which his father had begun against the Caledonians and other Picts, and set upon those Britans more remote, and the Inhabitants of the Ilands lying there, the wit∣nesses as one said of the Suns setting, some of them hee subdued by force and armes, others (for you must thinke he aspired to Rome and higher matters) by offering fees and stipends he allured and drew to be associates: Gelasius Ci∣zicenus lib. 1. Act. Concil. Nicaen. cap. 3. and there were besides of them, whom of open enemies he made his friends, and of old adversaries his very familiars. Afterwards, having vanquished the Frankners in Batavia, and that with so great glory, that he stamped certaine golden pieces of coine, (whereof I have seene one) with the Image of a woman sitting under a Trophee, and leaning with one hand upon a crosse∣bow or a brake, with this subscription, FRANCIA: and this writing about it, GAV∣DIVM ROMANORVM: Having also overthrowne the Barbarians in Germany, won unto him the German and French Nations: and levied souldiers out of Britaine, France, and Germany, to the number in all of 90000. foot, and 8000. horsemen, hee departed into Italie, overcame Maxentius, who at Rome had challenged to himselfe the Empire, and having conquered Italy, and vanquished the Tyrant, he restored un∣to the whole world the blessed gifts of secure libertie, and as we find in the Inscripti∣on of an Antiquitie, INSTINCTV DIVINITATIS, MENTIS MAGNITVDINE, CVM EXERCITV SVO, TAM DE TYRANNO QVAM DE OMNI EIVS FACTIONE, UNO TEMPORE IVSTIS REMP. ULTVS EST ARMIS, that is, By instinct of the divine power, with great magnanimitie, and the helpe of his owne armie, at one time in the behalfe of the Common wealth, he was by lawfull warre revenged as well of the Tyrant himselfe, as of his whole faction. Howbeit, that he returned againe into Italy, Eusebius implieth in these words : Con∣stantine, quoth he, passed over to the Britans enclosed on every side within the bankes of the Ocean: whom when hee had overcome, hee began to compasse in his mind other parts of the world, to the end he might come in time to succour those that wanted helpe. And in another place : After he had furnished his armie with mild and modest instructions of pietie, he in∣vaded Britaine, that he might likewise instruct those who dwell environed round about with the waves of the Ocean bounding the Suns setting, as it were with his coasts. And of Bri∣tan are these verses of Optatianus Porphyrius unto Constantine, to be understood: Omnis ab Arctois plaga finibus horrida Cauro, Pacis amat cana & comperta perennia jura, Et tibi fida tuis semper bene militat armis; Res{que} gerit virtute tuas, populos{que} feroces Propellit, cedit{que} lubens tibi debita rata, Et tua victores sors accipit hinc tibi fortes, Te{que} duce invictae sustollunt signa cohortes. From Northern bounds, the land throughout where bleak North-west winds blowen Lov's lawes of peace right ancient, and ever during knowen: Prest alwaies in their loyaltie for service in thy right, With valiant and couragious heart, doth all thy battels fight. Thus, Nations fierce it drives to rout, and doth in chase pursue, Yielding to thee right willingly all paiments just and due: Victors from hence most valorous, thy lot it is to have, And under thee unfoiled bands, advance their ensignes brave. About this time as evidently appeareth by the Code of Theodosius, Pacatianus Vicegeren of Britaine in the thir¦teenth yea of Consta ¦tine the Great. Pacatianus was the Vicarius of Britaine: for by this time the Province had no more Propraetors nor Lieutenants, but in stead thereof was a Vicar substituted. This Emperor Constantine, was right happy for very many praises, & those (I assure you) most justly deserved: for he not onely set the Roman Empire in free estate, but also having scattered the thicke cloud of Superstition, let in the true light of Christ, by setting open the Temples to the true God, and shutting them against the false. For now no sooner was the blustering tempest and storme of persecution blowne over, but the faithfull Christians, Gildas. who in the time of trouble and danger had hidden themselves in woods, desarts, and secret caves, being come abroad in open sight, reedifie the Churches ruinate to the very ground, the Temple of holy Martyrs they found, build, finish, and erect, as it were, the banners of victorie in every place, celebrate festivall holy-daies, and with pure heart and mouth also, performe their sacred solemnities. And thereupon he is renow∣ned under these titles. IMPERATOR FORTISSIMUS AC BEATISSIMUS, PIISSI∣MVS. FOELIX. URBIS LIBERATOR. QUIETIS FVNDATOR. REIPUBLICAE IN∣STAURATOR. PUBLICAE LIBERTATIS AUCTOR. RESTITVTOR URBIS RO∣MAE ATQVE ORBIS. MAGNUS. MAXIMUS. INVICTVS. INVICTISSIMUS. PER∣PETUUS. SEMPER AUGUSTUS. RERUM HUMANARUM OPTIMUS PRINCEPS. VIRTUTE FORTISSIMUS ET PIETATE CLEMENTISSIMUS. And in the Lawes, QUI VENERANDA CHRISTIANORUM FIDE ROMANUM MUNIVIT JMPERI∣UM. DIVUS. DIVAE MEMORIAE. DIVINAE MEMORIAE. &c. That is, Most valiant and blessed Emperour. Most pious. Happie. Redeemer of Rome Citie. Founder of Peace. Restorer of Rome Citie, and the whole world. Great. Most great. Invincible. Most in∣vincible. Perpetuall. Ever Augustus. The best Prince of the World. For vertue most valiant, and for pietie most mercifull. Also, Who fortified the Roman Empire with the reverend Faith of the Christians. Sacred. Of sacred Memorie; Of Divine memorie, &c. And hee was the first Emperour, as farre as I could ever to this time observe, who in coines of mo∣ney and publike workes, was honoured with this Inscription, DOMINUS NOSTER, that is, Our Lord. Although I know full well, that Dioclesian was the first after Ca∣ligula, who suffered himselfe openly to be called LORD. Howbeit, in this so worthy an Emperour, his politike wisedome was wanting in this point, that he made the way for barbarous people, into Britaine, Germanie, and Gaule. For when he had subdued the northerne Nations, so, as that now he stood in no feare of them, and for to equall the power of the Persians, who in the East parts threatned the Roman Empire, had built Constantinople a new Citie: those Legi∣ons that lay in defence of the Marches, he partly translated into the East, and in their stead built forts and holds, and partly withdrew into Cities more remote from the said marches: so that soone after his death, the Barbarians forcing the townes and fortresses, brake into the Provinces. And in this respect there goeth a very bad report of him in Zosimus, as being the main, and first subverter of a most flourishing Empire. The Roman civill govern∣ment in Britaine, under the lat∣ter Emperors. As L L. chiefe Justices, Grand Sene∣schals, or high Stewards. Seeing moreover, that Constantine altered the forme of the Roman government, it shall not be impertinent in this very place to note summarily, in what sort Britaine was ruled under him, and afterward in the next succeeding ages. He ordained foure Praefects of the Praetorium, to wit, of the East, of Illyricum, of Italie, and of Gaule: two Magistros Militum. Vicar of Bri∣taine. Leaders or Commanders of the Forces, the one of footmen, the other of horse∣men in the West, whom they termed Praesentales. For civill government there ruled Britaine, the Praefect of the Praetorium, or Grand Seneschall in Gaule, and under him the Vicar Generall of Britaine, who was his Vice∣gerent, and honoured with the title Spectabilis, that is, notable or remarkable. Him obeied respectively to the number of the Provinces, two Consular Deputies, and three Presidents, who had the hearing of civill, and criminall causes. For militarie affaires, there ruled the Leader, or Commander of the footmen in the West: at whose disposition, were the Comes. Count or Lieutenant of Britaine; the Count or Lieutenant of the Saxon-coast along Britaine, and the Duke of Britaine, sti∣led every one, Spectabiles. Spectabiles, that is, Remarkable. Comes of Britaine. The Count Lieutenant of Britaine, seemeth to have ruled the in-land parts of the Island: who had with him seven companies of footmen, and nine cornets or troups of horsemen. Comes of the Saxon shore. The Count or Lieutenant of the Saxon coast, namely, who defended the mari∣time parts, against the Saxons, and is named by Ammianus, Comes maritimi tractus, that is, Lieutenant of the Maritime tract, for defence of the Sea coast, had seven companies of footmen, two guidons of horsemen, the second Legion, and one cohort. Duke of Bri∣taine. The Generall of Britan, who defended the Marches or Frontiers against the Barba∣rians, had the command of eight and thirty garrison forts, wherein kept their Stations 14000. foot, and 900. horsemen. So that in those daies, (if Pancirolus have kept just computation) Britaine maintained 19200. footemen, and 1700 horsemen, or much there about, in ordinarie. Besides all these, Comes sacrarum Largitionum, that is, The Receiver of the Em∣perours Finances or publike revenues, had under him in Britaine, the Rationall or Auditor of the summes and revenues of Britaine: the Resembling the Lord Treasurer. Provost of the Augustian, that is, Emperours Treasures in Britaine, and the Procurator of the Gynegium or Draperie in Britaine, in which the clothes of the Prince, and souldiers were woven. The Comes rerum privatarum: as one would say, Keeper of the privie purse. Constantine the Emperor. Count also of private Revenues had his Rationall, or Auditour of private State in Britaine: to say nothing of the sword, Fence Schoole, Procurator in Britaine, (where∣of an old Inscription maketh mention,) and of other officers of an inferiour degree. When Constantine was dead, Britaine fell unto his Sonne Constantine: who upon an ambitious humour, and desire of rule, breaking into the possessions of other men, Constans, Emperour. was slaine by his brother Constans. With which victory hee was so puffed up, that he seized Britaine, and the rest of the Provinces into his owne hands, and with his brother Constantius came into this Island. And thereupon Julius Firmicus, not that Pagane the Astrologer, but the Christian, speaketh in this wise unto them: Yee have in Winter time (a thing that never was done before, nor shall be againe) subdued un∣der your oares the swelling and raging billowes of the British Ocean. The waves now of the sea, unto this time well neere unknowne unto us, have trembled, and the Britaines were sore afraid to see the unexpected face of the Emperour. What would ye more? the very Ele∣ments as vanquished, have given place unto your vertues. This Constans it was that called a Councell to Sardica, against the A ians: unto which there assembled three hundred Bishops, Athanasius in Apolog. 2. and among them the Bishops of Bri∣taine; who having condemned the Heretikes, and established the Nicaene Creed, by their voices and judgements, approved the innocencie of Athanasius. But this Prince being youthfull, Magnentius called also Taporus. cast behind him all care of the Empire, and became drowned in pleasures: and thereby growing grievous to the Provincials, and nothing acceptable to his souldiers, was by Magnentius, Comitem. captaine of the Iovij and Herculij, as he hunted, beset in a towne called Saint Helens, and there killed; fulfilling thereby a prophesie, which was, That he should end his life in his grandmothers lap, of whom that towne indeed tooke the name. This Magnentius having a Britan to his Father, but borne among the Laeti, a peo∣ple in France, when he had now slaine Constans, invested himselfe in France into the Imperiall dignitie, and wonne Britaine unto him to take his part: but having been for three yeares together coursed by his brother Constantius, who sharply made war upon him, laid violent hands on himselfe: a fortunate Prince as ever any was, for sea∣sonable temperature of the weather, for plentie of fruits, and securitie from dangers of Barbarians, points which are by the vulgar people reputed to make especially for the glorie of Princes. But why this Magnentius should be called Taporus in an old anti∣quitie of stone, digged up long since at Rome, let other men enquire: For thus it is read, speaking of the Obeliske, erected in the birque or shew-place. Interea Taporo Romam vastante Tyranno, Angelus Roch . Augusti jacuit, donum studium{que} locandi. Meane while that Tyrant Taporus of Rome did havocke make, The Empe∣rours. Augustus gift unplaced lay, none would it undertake. At this time, the Generall of all the warre-forces throughout Britaine, was Grati∣anus surnamed Funarius, the father of Ualentinian the Emperour. And called hee was Funarius, Gratianus Fu∣narius. Am. Marcelli∣nus. for that being yet but a stripling, or young springall, as he went about with a rope to sell, he gaue not ground to five soldiers that did set upon him, and as∣saied with all their force to snatch the same from him. This Gratianus being returned to his owne home, and discharged of his military oath, was fined by Constantius in the confiscation, and losse of his goods, because he was reported to have lodged Mag∣nentius, and given him entertainment. When Magnentius was dead and gone, Britaine submitted it selfe to the govern∣ment of Constantius: Constantius. Paulus Catena. and forthwith was hither sent Paulus the Notarie a Spaniard borne, one verily under a smooth countenance lying secret and close, but exceeding subtill to devise and find out all the casts and wylie meanes to endanger men: That hee might bring certaine martiall and military men within danger who had conspired with Magnentius, when as they could not chuse nor make resistance, after he had outragiously come over them in man∣ner of a floud hee suddenly seised upon the fortunes and estates of many. Thus went he on still making spoile, Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 14. yea, and undoing a great number, imprisoning such as were free borne, and grieving their bodies with bonds, yea, & bruising some of them with manacles, and all, by pat∣ching and piecing many crimes together laid to their charge, which were as false as might be. Whereupon was committed so wicked an act as branded the daies of Constantius with a per∣petuall note of infamie. Martin, Vicar of Britaine. There was one Martin that ruled those provinces as Vicar of Vice∣gerent; who grievously lamenting the miseries, and calamities of the innocent, and beseeching the said Paulus oftentimes, that the guiltlesse might be spared, when hee saw that hee could not prevaile, threatned to depart, to the end, that this malicious inquisitor, and persecutor, at leastwise for feare thereof, might give over at length, to enveagle and induce into open dan∣gers, men bred and nuzzeled in quiet peace. Paulus, supposing heereby, that his trade decaied, (as hee was a vengible fellow in linking matters together, whereupon he came to be surnamed Catena, that is, a Chaine) drew in the said Vicar himselfe, (who still maintained the defence of those whom he had tendred and spared,) to have his part in common perils: And hee went very neere to bring him also prisoner bound, with tribunes, and many others, before the Emperours privie Counsell. At which extremitie of mischiefe so imminent, he being throughly provoked, caught up a dagger, and assaulteth the same Paulus: but because his right hand failed him, so that he was not able to give him a deadly wound, hee stabbed himselfe into the side with the said weapon drawne as it was. And so by this foule kind of death departed hee this life; (a right just man) after he had assaied to stay, and delay the woefull and pitious cases of many. Which wicked parts thus committed, What tortu∣ring Instru∣ment this Eculeus was, seene in Caro∣lus Sigonius. De Iudiciis lib. 3. cap 17. Paulus, all embrued with bloud, returned into the Prin∣ces Court: bringing many with him over-laden with chaines, as being men dejected, and plunged into miserable calamitie, and heavie plight. At whose comming the rackes were made ready: the executioner prepared drags and tortures: and of them many were proscribed, and outlawed, some banished, and other suffred punishment by sword. At length himselfe also under Julian being burnt quicke, by the judgement of God the Revenger of such outragious crueltie, paide most justly for his deserts. After this when as in Britaine, Ammianus Marcellinus is mine Author,) upon the breach of peace, by the rodes of Scots and Picts, (savage nations) the places neere bor∣dering upon them, appointed for the Frontiers, were forraied, and the provinces wearied with calamities past, that came so thicke one in the necke of another, and put in frightfull perplexitie. Julian whom Constantius had declared to be Caesar, and col∣legue in the Empire, wintering about Paris, and distracted with sundry cares, feared to goe and aid the provinciall people beyond-sea, as we reported that Constantius be∣foretime had done, lest he should leave Gaule without a governour: considering withall, that the Alamans were even then also incited, and set upon crueltie and ho∣stilitie; thought good therefore it was to send over into these parts, for to compose and settle all matters, one Lupicinus, Lupicinus, Magister Armorum. Master at that time of the Armour: a warlike Knight, I assure you, and skilfull in military affaires; but a man of a haughtie spirit, and setting up his eie-browes aloft like hornes, and withall speaking bigge, and (as folke say) in a tragicke Key upon the stage: concerning whom, the question was a long time, whether he were more covetous than cruell. Having raised therefore an aid of light appointed men, to wit, the Heruleans, Batavians, and many companies of the Now Bul∣garians. Maesians, the foresaid Generall in the heart of Winter, came to Bologne: and there having gotten shipping, and embarqued all his souldiers, observing a good gale of a forewind, Rhutupiae. London. arrived at Rhutupiae, a place over against Bologne, and so set for∣ward to London: that, from thence after counsell taken, according to the qualitie of his businesse, he might hasten the sooner to give battell. Under this Constantius, who mightily favoured the Arians, their heresie crept in∣to Britaine, The heresie of Arius. wherein from the first yeares of the great Constantine, a sweete concent and harmonie of Christ the head, and his members had continued, untill such time, as that deadly and perfidious Arianisme, Gildas. like to a pestiferous Serpent from the other side of the sea, casting up her venom: upon us, caused brethren dwelling together, to be dis-joyned piteously one from another: and thus, the way as it were, being made over the Ocean, all other cruell and fell beasts wheresoever, shaking out of their horrible mouthes the mortiferous poison of every heresie, inflicted the deadly stings and wounds of their teeth upon this our countrey, desirous evermore to heare some noveltie, but holding nought at all stedfastly. In favour of these Arians, Sulpitius Se∣verus. Constantius summoned foure hundred Bishops of the West Church, to Ariminum: for whom the Emperour, by his commandement, allowed corne and victuals. These calleth Hilarius, The Bishops of the Provinces of Britaine, in an Epistle unto the Bi∣shops. But that was thought of the Aquitanes, French, and Britaines, an unseemely thing: refusing therefore that allowance out of the Emperours coffers, they chose rather to live at their owne proper charges. Three onely out of Britaine for want of their owne, had mainte∣nance from the State, refusing the contribution offered unto them from the rest: reputing it more safe, and void of corruption, to charge the common treasure, than the private state of any person. After this, when Constantius was departed this world, Julianus that Apostata, who had taken upon him the title of Augustus against Constantius, first drave out Palladi∣us, who had been master of Offices, into Britaine, and sent away Alphius, who had go∣verned Britan as Deputy Lieutenant, Julian the Emperour. Am. Marcel∣linus. to reedifie Jerusalem: but fearefull round balles of flaming fire breaking forth neere unto the foundations, skarred him from that en∣terprize, and many a thousand of Jewes who wrestled in vaine against the decree of God, were overwhelmed with the ruines. This dissolute Or Empe∣rour. Augustus, and in his beard onely a Philosopher, feared (as hath erewhile been said) to come and aid the poore distressed Britans: and yet from hence he carried out every yeare great store of corne to maintaine the Roman garrisons in Germany. When Valentinian the Emperour steered the helme of the Roman Empire, Valentinian Emperour. what time as through the whole world the trumpets resounded nothing but the warlike Al, Arme, the Picts, Saxons, Scots and Attacots vexed the Britans with continuall trou∣bles and annoyances. Fraomarius then King of the Almanes was translated hither, and by commission made Tribune or Marshall over a band of the Almanes, for number and power in those daies highly renowned, Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 27. and 28. to represse the incursions of those barba∣rous nations. Neverthelesse Britaine was through the generall conspiracie of those Barbari∣ans afflicted and brought to extreme distresse, Nectaridius Comes or Lieutenant of the ma∣ritime tract slaine, and Bucholbaudes the Generall by an ambush of the enemies circumven∣ted. The intelligence of which occurrences when it was brought unto Rome with great horror, the Emperour sent Severus, being even then Lord High Steward of his houshold, to re∣dresse what was done amisse, in case his hap had beene to have seene the wished end: who be∣ing within a while after called away, Iovinius went to the same parts, This place of the text is haply cor∣rupted. sent backe Proventu∣sides in post, minding to crave the puissant helpe of an armie. For, they avouched than the urgent necessary occasions required so much. At the last, so many and so fearefull calamities were by daily rumors reported as touching the same Iland, that Theodosius was elected, and appointed to make speed thither, Theodosius. a man of approved skill in warlike affaires most fortunatelie atchieved, who having levied and gotten unto him a couragious company of young gallants, to furnish as well Legions as cohorts, put himselfe in his journey, with a brave shew of confi∣dence leading the way. Picts. Scots. Attacots. At the same time the Picts divided into two nations the Dicalido∣nes and Vecturiones, the Attacots likewise a warlike people, and the Scots, ranging in di∣vers parts did much mischiefe where they went. As for the cohorts of Gaule, the Frank∣ners and Saxons confining upon them, brake out and made rodes where ever they could ei∣ther by land or sea, and what with driving booties, with firing towns, and killing poore cap∣tives, made foule worke there. To stay these wofull miseries, if prosperous fortune would have given leave, this most vigorous and valiant Captaine intending a voiage to the ut∣most bounds of the earth: when he was come to the sea side at Boloigne, which lieth divided from the opposite tract of land, by a narrow Called the sleeve. streit ebbing and flowing, where the water is wont to swell on high with terrible tides, and againe to fall downe flat and lie like even plains without any harme of sailer or passenger, Ribchester. by Sandwich, or Richbo∣row. from thence having sailed and leasurely crossed the said sea, he arrived as Rhutupiae a quiet rode and harbour over against it: From whence af∣ter that the Batavians, Heruli, Iovij and Victores, (companies confident of their strength and power who followed) were come, hee departed: and marching toward London, an old towne, London cal∣led Augusta. which the posteritie called Augusta▪ having divided his troopes into sundry parts hee set upon those companies of roving and robbing enemies, even when they were heavy loa∣den with bootie and pillage. And having quickly discomfited those that drave before them their prisoners bound, and cattell, he forced them to forgoe the prey, which the most misera∣ble tributaries had lost. In the end, after full restitution made of all, save onely some small parcels bestowed upon his wearied souldiers, he entred most joyfully into the citie, over set before with distresses and calamities, but now suddenly refreshed; so far forth as hope of recovery, and safetie might effect: and there being raised up with this luckie hand, to adventure greater exploits, and yet casting with himselfe projects promising securitie, he staied doubtfull of the future event; as having learned by the information of revolting fugitives and confession of captives, that so great a multitude of sundry nations, and a stiffe-necked people of so fell and fierce a disposition, could not possibly be vanquished but by secret wiles, and sudden excursions. Finally, after proclamations published, and promises made of impunitie, he summoned as well the traiterous run∣agates as many others that went with free pasport dispersed sundry waies, to present themselves ready for service. Vpon which summons given, so soone as most of them were returned, he as one pricked forward with so good a motive, and yet held backe by heavie cares, Civilis. called for Civilis by name, (who was to rule Britaine as Deputie,) to bee sent unto him; a man of a very quicke hastie nature, but a precise keeper of Iustice and righ∣teousnesse: likewise for Dulcitius, Dulcitius. a redoubted Captaine, and right skilfull in feates of armes. Afterwards, having gotten heart, and courage to him, he went from Augusta, which in old time they called Londinum, well appointed with industrious, and considerate souldiers, and so brought exceeding great succour to the ruinate, and troubled estate of the Britaines, gaining before hand all places every where for his advantage to forelay the Barbarians in ambush, and giving commandement of no service to the very common souldiers, but hee would him∣selfe cheerefully take the first assay thereof. In this sort performing as well the offices of an active and hardie souldier, as the carefull charge of a right noble Generall, having discomfi∣ted and put to flight divers nations, whom insolent pride fed with securitie incited, and set on fire to assaile and invade the Roman Empire, he having laid the foundation of quiet peace for a long time, restored both Cities and Castles, which verily had received manifold damma∣ges, to as good a passe as ever they were at. Now there had hapned whiles he atchieved these exploits, an horrible act like to have bred some great danger, but that in the very first en∣terprize it was quenched and suppressed. There was one Valentinus of Valeria Pannonia, a man of a proud spirit, Valentine stirreth up se∣dition in Britaine. brother to the wife of that pestilent Maximinus, first Deputie Lieute∣nant, & after President, for some notable offence banished into Britaine; who being impatient of rest like a noisom beast rose up in cōmotion against Theodosius, practising mischievous plots and an insurrection, upon a certaine swelling pride and envie, for that hee perceived him a∣lone able to withstand his horrible designes. Howbeit, casting all about for many meanes both secret and apert, whiles the puffing humour of his infinite, and unsatiable desire still encreased, he solicited as well the banished persons as souldiers, when he espied his opportunity, promising reward, for to allure and draw them on to some actuall attempt. And now as the time drew neere when these enterprizes should bee put in execution, and take effect, the Ge∣nerall being advertised of all these projects, and forwarder of the twaine to adventure, re∣solute also upon an high mind to take revenge of such as were attaint and convict, commit∣ted verily Valentinus with some few of his inward complices unto Captaine Dulcitius, for to bee put to death: but forecasting withall, the future events, (as hee was a man in militarie skill surpassing all others of his time) he would not suffer any farther inquisition and exa∣mination to be had of the conspirators, for feare lest by striking a terrour among so many, the tempestuous troubles of the provinces which were well appeased, might revive againe. Tur∣ning himselfe therefore from this businesse to the reforming of many enormities, which of necessitie were to be regarded, and having cleared all dangers (for evidently seene it was that fortune was so propitious and good unto him, as that she never forsooke but sped his enter∣prizes) he reedified the Cities, and those garrison forts whereof we spake; he fortified also the frontiers with standing watches and strong fore-fenses. Thus having recovered the province which had yielded subjection to the enemies, hee so brought it to the former ancient state, that upon his owne motion to have it so, Valentia. Areani. it both had a lawfull governour to rule it, and after∣ward also was called VALENTIA, for the Princes will and pleasure. The Areans a kind of men instituted by those of ancient times (concerning whom I have related in the Acts of Constans the Emperor) fallen by little and little unto vices, he removed from their stations, as being openly convict that they were allured by great receits, or promise at least waies of much reward, to have divers times discovered unto the Barbarians whatsoever was done or debated among us. For, this indeed was their charge, to run to and fro by long journeies, to intimate and make knowne unto our Captaines all sturs that the people neere adjoyning were about to make. Thus, after he had with very great approofe exploited these acts above rehear∣sed, and others the like; he was sent for to the Princes-court, and leaving the Provinces in much jollitie, no lesse honoured was he for his many and important victories, than either Fu∣rius Camillus or Papirius Cursor. And so being honorably accompanied and attended upon with the love and favour of all men as far as to the narrow seas, with a gentle gale of wind he passed over and came to the Princes camp, where with joy and praise hee was received. For these deeds of his so bravely atchieved, in honor of him, there was an image set up, resembling a man of armes on horsebacke, as Symmachus giveth us to understand, speaking to his son Theodosius the Emperor in this wise. The author, quoth he, of your kindred and stock, Captaine Generall sometime in Afrik and Britaine both, was among other ancient titles consecrated by the most honorable order with Images of Knighthood: And Claudian in his commendation with full pen wrote poetically thus; Ille Caledoniis posuit qui castra pruinis, Qui medio Libyae sub casside pertulit aestus. Terribilis Mauro, debellator{que} Britanni Littoris, ac pariter Boreae vastator & Austri. Quid rigor aeternus? Caeli quid sydera prosunt? Ignotum{que} fretum? maduerunt Saxone fuso Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule, Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Hiberne. In frozen Caledonian fields he that encamped lay, And in his harnesse, Liby heats endured day by day: The black Mores eke who terrified, and conquer'd British coast, Who North and South subdu'd alike, and wasted with his host, What did the lasting cold to them and frosty climats gaine, Or seas unknowne? embrued all with bloud of Saxons slaine The Orkneis were, with Pictish bloud well heated Thule was, And y e Ireland, Scots by heapes bewail'd with Out-alas. In another place likewise of the same Prince. —Quem littus adustae Horrescit Libyae, ratibus{que} impervia Thule, Ille leves Mauros, nec falso nomine Pictos Edomuit, Scotum{que} vago mucrone sequutus Fregit Hyperboreas remit audacibus undas; Et geminis fulgens utro{que} sub axe trophaeis Tethyos alternas refluas calcavit arenas. Of whom the scorched Libyan coast doth stand in deadly feare, And Thule, where no passage was for ships their saile to beare. The nimble Mores he t'was that tam'd, and Picts likewise subdu'd, The Picts, I say, by right so cal'd: and when he had pursued The Scot with sword from place to place, the Hyperborean wave With venterous ores he brake: and so in two fold trophees braue All glittering under both the poles he marched to and fro The sands upon, where either sea by turnes doth ebbe and flow. And concerning him Pacatus Drepanus: What should I speak, quoth he, of the Scot, dri∣ven back againe by him unto his fennes and bogs? Gratianus Emperour. The Saxon consumed with battels at sea, &c. After him, Gratian took upon him the Empire, who also proclaimed Theodosius, the son of that Theodosius (of whom we have spoken already) Emperor: Whereat Maximus a Spaniard borne, Maximus the Tyrant. Zosimus. Orosius. his concurrent, and withall descended in right line from Cōstantinus the Great, who also had before time been Generall over the armie in Bri∣tan, was so highly discontented, that he took upon him the purple roabe: or as Orosius reporteth, was against his will by the souldiers saluted Emperor; a valiant man, vertu∣ous, & worthy of the title of Emperor. Augustus, but that against his allegiance, he had by way of tyranny & usurpation attained to the place. Who at the first couragiously vanqui∣shed the Picts & Scots, Prosper. Tyro. that used to make many inrodes into the Province: afterwards with all the flower and strength well neere of British forces, arrived in the mouth of Rhene, and procured unto himselfe the whole puissance of the German armies: ordai∣ned the Royall seat of the Empire to be at Treviris. Gregorius. Toronensis. Triers (whereupon stiled he was by the name of Trevericus Imperator) & spreading, as Gildas saith, his wings the one as far as to Spaine, the other into Italy, with the terror only of his name, levied tributes and pensions for souldiers pay, of the most fell and savage nations in Germanie. Against whom Gratianus having led an armie, after five daies skirmishing, being forsaken of his owne souldiers, and put to flight, sent Saint Ambrose Embassadour to treat for peace: which he obtained indeed; but the same full of treacherous guile. For, Cedrenus. Maximus suborned, and sent under-hand one Andragathius, riding in a close litter or carroch, with a rumour spread abroad, that therein rode the wife of Gratian. Unto which when Gratian was come for love of his wife, and had opened the said litter, forth leapes Andragathius, with his companie, and slew him outright in the place. Whose body for to demand, was Ambrose sent a second time: howbeit, not admit∣ted, because he refused to communicate with those Bishops, that sided with Maxi∣mus. Who being lifted up, and proud of those things hapning to his mind, appoin∣ted his sonne Victor to be Caesar, dealt cruelly with Gratians Captaines, and setled the State in France. Zosimus. Theodosius Augustus, who governed in the East, at the requests or mandates rather of his Embassadours, acknowledged him Emperour, and exhibi∣ted his Image unto the Alexandrines for to be seene in publike place. And now ha∣ving by violence, and extortion entred upon the estates of all men, with the utter un∣doing of the common-wealth, hee fulfilled his owne greedie avarice. Hee made the defence of Catholike Religion his pretences to colour his tyrannie; Priscillian, and certaine of his Sectaries convict of hereticall, Priscillianists. Sulpitius Seve∣rus. and false doctrine in the Synode, or Councell of Burdeaux, and appealing unto him, hee condemned to death; although Martin that most holy Bishop of Turonum. Tourain or Tours, most humbly besought to for∣beare shedding the bloud of those poore wretches: avouching that it was sufficient to deprive such as were judged heretikes, and put them out of their Churches, by the definitive sentence of Bishops: and that it was a strange and unexampled hainous deed, that a secular Judge should determine causes of the Church. And these were the first, that being executed by the civill sword, left a foule and dangerous president to posteritie. After this he entred Italie with so great terrour, that Ualentinian, toge∣ther with his mother, were glad to flie unto Theodosius, the cities of Italie received him, and did him all the honour that might be: but the Bononians above the rest, a∣mong whom this Inscription is yet to be seene, DD. NN. MAG. C. MAXIMO, ET FL. UICTORI, PIIS, FELICIBVS, SEMPER AVGVSTIS. Bono Reip. B. R. NATIS. To our Great Lords, C. Maximus & Fl, Victor, Pious, Happie, Alwaies Augusti, borne for the good of the Common-wealth. Meane while Nannius and Quintinus, Masters in militarie skill, unto whom Maxi∣mus had committed the infancie of his sonne, Sulpitius Alex∣ander. and the custodie of Gaule, gave the Frankners, who annoied Gaule with their incursions, a mightie great overthrow, and forced them to give hostages, and deliver into their hands the Authors of the warre. As for Valentinian, he earnestly besought Theodosius, to succour him dispoiled of his Empire by a Tyrant, from whom for a good while, he could have none other answer, but this, Zonaras. That no marvel it is, if a seditious servant became superiour to that Lord, who cast∣eth off the true Lord indeed. For Valentinian was corrupted with Arianisme. Howbeit, wearied at length with his importunate praiers, he setteth forward in warlike manner against Maximus, who in the same time abode in Aquileia, very secure & fearlesse. For he had before-hand fortified the streits between the mountains with garrisons, and the havens with shipping, so that with great alacritie, and much confidence at the first hee welcomed Theodosius with one battel before Syscia in Pannonia: Zosimus. & afterwards most valiantly received him with another, Sisseg. under the leading of his brother Marcellus; but in both of them he sped so badly, that he withdrew himselfe secretly into Aquileia, where by his owne souldiers, as he dealt money among them, taken he was, and de∣vested of his Imperiall ornaments, brought before Theodosius, who immediatly de∣livered him into the hangmans hand to be executed, after that he had now worne the purple roabe five yeares. Whereupon Ausonius writeth thus in praise of Aquileia: Non erat iste locus: meritò tamen aucta recenti, Nona inter claras Aquileia cieberis urbes Itala ad Illyricos objecta colonia montes, Moenibus & portu celeberrima: sed magis illud Eminet, extremo quòd te sub tempore legit, Solverat exacto cui justa piacula lustro Maximus, armigeri quondam sub nomine lixae. Foelix qui tanti spectatrix laeta Triumphi, Or, udisti▪ Punîsti Ansonio Rutupinum Marte Latronem. This was no place of name: but since that fresh desert gave grace, Thou Aquileia of cities faire, shalt be the ninth in place, A Colonie Italian, gainst hils Illyrian set, For strong wals, and commodious haven right well renown'd: but yet This passeth all the rest, that he his choice of thee, did make Against his latter daies, who did revengement justly take Of Maximus: a base campe-Squire that sometimes knowne to be, Had now usurped five yeares past, and ruled with tyrannie. Right happy thou, of Triumph such that had'st the joyfull sight, Killing this Robber British, or of Britaine. Rhutupine by maine Italian might. Andragathus, whose state was now most desperate, cast himselfe from shipboard headlong into the Sea. Victor the sonne of Maximus, was in France defeated, ta∣ken prisoner, and slaine. But those Britans, who tooke part with Maximus, as some writers doe record, forcibly invaded Armorica in France, and there planted them∣selves. Now Theodosius presently after his victorie, entred Rome with his Sonne Honorius in triumph, and published an Edict to this effect: No man so hardy, as to chal∣lenge or claime that honour, which the bold Tyrant had granted: but that such presumption should bee condemned, and reduced to the former estate. And Valentinian, in these words; All judgements and awards whatsoever, that Maximus the most wicked and dete∣stable Tyrant that ever was, hath given forth to be promulged and enacted, we reverse and condemne. But Saint Ambrose in his funerall Sermon of Theodosius, crieth out in these termes: That Eugenius and Maximus, by their wofull example, doe testifie in hell, what a heavie thing it is to beare armes against their naturall Princes. To speake in a word, this victory was held to be so worthy and memorable, that the Romans from thence forward, Procopius. solemnized that day every yeare, as festivall. There succeeded Theodosius in the West Empire his sonne Honorius, Honorius, Emperour. a child ten yeares old; over whom was ordained as Tutor and Protector Flavius Stilicho, a man passing famous for a long time, as who being an inward companion of Theodosius in all his warres and victories, and by degrees of militarie service, advanced unto high authoritie, and the Princes affinitie, in the end cloied and glutted with prosperitie, and carried away through ambition, miserably lost his life. This man surely for cer∣taine yeares, had a provident regard of the Empires good estate, and defended Bri∣taine against the invasion of Picts, Scots, and Vandals. And hereof it is, that Britaine speaketh thus of her selfe in Claudian: Me quo{que} vicinis pereuntem gentibus, inquit, Munivit Stilicho, totam quum Scotus Hibernem Movit, & infesto spumavit remige Thetis. Illius effectum curis, ne bella timorem Scotica, nec Pictum tremerem, ne littore toto Prospicerem dubiis venientem Saxona ventis. And me likewise at hand, quoth she, to perish, in despight Of neighbour Nations Stilicho protected 'gainst their might, What time the Scots all Ireland mov'd, offensive armes to take, And with the stroke of enemies ores, the Sea much fome did make. He brought to passe, (his care was such) that I the Scotish warre Should feare no more, nor dread the Picts, ne yet ken from a farre, (Along the shore whiles I looke still when wavering winds will turne) The Saxons comming under saile, my coasts to spoile and burne. And thus for that time Britaine seemed safe enough from any danger of enemies. For in another place, that Poet writeth thus : —Domito quod Saxona, Thetis Mitior, aut fracto Secura Britannia Picto. What either seas more quiet now, that Saxons conquer'd are, Or Britaine become secure, since Picts subdued were. And when Alaricus King of the Gothes, hovered about Rome, seeking meanes to assault and spoile it, that Legion which in the marches kept Station against the Bar∣barians was called from hence, as Claudian signifieth, when he reckoneth up the aids sent for from all parts. Venit & extremis legio praetenta Britannis, Quae Scoto dat fraena truci, ferro{que} notatas Perlegit Or, exangues. exanimes Picto moriente figuras. The Legion also came which did for British frontiers lie In garrison, that curbs fell Scots, and doth pursue with eie Those yron-brent markes in Picts now seene, all bloudlesse as they die. Fastidius. Genadius. Chrysanthus. Niephorus. In these daies flourished Fastidius a Bishop of Britaine, and wrote bookes of divine learning, I assure you. Chrysanth s likewise the sonne of Bishop Martian, who having beene a Consular deputy in Italy under Theodosius, and made Lieutenant, or Deputie. Uicar of Britan, de∣served that praise and admiration for his good mannaging of the common-weale that he was against his will enstalled at Constantinople Bishop of the Novatians, who having made a schisme in that Church, and calling themselves Pure. Cathari, had Bishops apart of their owne and sectaries, who stoutly but impiously denied, that such as after baptisme received, fell by relapse into sinne, could not returne againe and bee saved. This is that Bishop, who as wee read in histories, of all Ecclesiasticall revenues and profits, Tripartite Historie. was wont to reserve nothing for himselfe but two loaves of bread onely on the Lords day. When as now the Roman Empire began to decline and decay, and barbarous Nations every way made foule havocke of the provinces all over the Continent; the British armes fearing least the flame of their neighbours fire might flash out and catch hold likewise of them; supposing also that they stood in need of some Generall & So∣veraign commander, to expell the Barbarians, addressed themselves to the election of Emperors. Marcus, Em∣perour. First therefore, they enthronized in the royall seat Marcus, and him they o∣beied, as one that in these parts bare the chief soveraignty. But afterward having made him away, Gratian, Em∣perour. because his carriage was not answerable unto theirs, they bring foorth and set up Gratian, countryman of their owne: him they crowned and arraied in the re∣gall purple, and him they dutifully attended upon, as their Prince. Howbeit upon a mislike that they tooke to him also, at foure moneths end, they deprive him of his Em∣pire, take away his life, Constantine, Emperour. and made over the Soveraignty of State to one Constantine, a souldier of the meanest place, onely because his name imported, as they thought, the osse of good luck. For they conceived assured hope, that he by the fortunate name of Constantine, would likewise constantly and fortunately governe the Empire and dis∣patch all enemies, like as that Constantine he Great had done, who in Britaine was advanced to the Imperiall dignitie. This Constantine putting to sea from Britan, lan∣ded at Bologne in France, and easily induced withal the Roman forces as far as to the Alpes to joyne with him in his war. Valence. Valentia in France he manfully defended against the puissance of Honorius Augustus the Roman Emperor: the Rhene which long be∣fore had been neglected, he fortified with a garison: Upon the Alpes, as well Monte Gene∣bre, or Mont Cen . Cottiae and Monte Mojore de S. Bernardo Peninae, as those toward the Montag i Carrara & Lu∣nigiana, in the Countie of Tendar. maritime coasts, where ever there was any pas∣sage, he built fortresses: In Spaine, under the leading and name of his sonne Constans, whom of a Monk he had denounced Augustus or Emperor, he warred with fortunate successe: and afterwards by letters sent unto Honorius, requesting to be held excu∣sed for suffering the purple forcibly to be done upon him by the souldiers, received at his hands of free gift, the Imperiall roabe. Whereupon he became prouder than be∣fore, and after he had passed over the Alpes intended to march directly to Rome: but hearing that Alaricus the King of the Goths (who had sided with him) was dead, hee retired himselfe to Arles, where he planted his Imperiall seat, commanded the Citie to be called Constantina, and ordained therein, that the assemblies for Assizes of 7. provinces should be held. His sonne Constans hee sendeth for out of Spaine, to the end that meeting together they might consult as touching the State. Who leaving the furniture of his Court and wife at Carragoca. Caesar Augusta, and committing the charge of all matters within Spaine to Gerontius, came speedily without intermission of journey to his father. When they had met together, after many daies, Constantinus seeing no feare of any danger from Italy, gave himselfe wholly to gluttony and belli-cheere, and so adviseth his sonne to returne into Spaine. But when he had sent his for∣ces to march before, whiles he abode still with his father, newes came out of Spaine, that Maximus one of his vassals and followers was by Gerontius set up and advan∣ced to the Empire; and having about him a strong power and retinue of barbarous nations prepared to come against them. Whereat they being affrighted, Constans and Decimius Rusticus, who of the Master of Offices was now become the Prefect, ha∣ving dispatched Edobeccus before unto the German Nations, together with the Frankners, Almans & all the militarie forces, went into France, intending out of hand to returne unto Constantinus. But as for Constans, Gerontius intercepted him by the way at Vienna in France, and killed him: Constantine himselfe he besieged with∣in Arles: to raise this siege and to assaile him in hostile manner, when one Constantius sent from Honorius made hast with an armie, Gerontius fearefully fled: whereupon his souldiers for anger and indignation beset his house round about, and drave him to those hard streits, that first he cut off Alanus his most trusty friends head, then he laid violent hands upon Nunnichia the said Alanus wife, who earnestly desired to die with her husband; Nicephorus. Callistus. and last of all perished himselfe. Constantinus being very straitly shut up, and withall utterly dejected and cast down with the unfortunate fight of Edobec∣cus, after he had beene beleaguerd foure moneths, and raigned likewise foure yeares, laid away his purple habite, entred into a Church, and tooke the orders of priesthood, and soone after, having surrendred Arles, was led captive into Italie, and there behea∣ded, together with a sonne of his, whom he had named As one would say, Heire appa∣rant. Nobilissimus, and a brother called Sebastian. From that time returned Britaine, under the Empire of Honorius, and was refreshed a while, through the wisedome and prowesse of Victorinus, who then ruled the Province, and repressed the outroades of Picts and Scots. In commen∣dation of whom, Victorinus Rector or Ruler of Bri∣taine. in Rutilius Claudius, are these verses extant, answerable in worth to the Author. Conscius Oceanus virtutum, conscia Thule, Et quaecun{que} ferox arva Britannus arat. Quà Praefectorum vicibus frenata potestas Perpetuum magni foenus amoris habet. Extremum pars illa quidem discessit in orbem, Sed tanquam medio rector in orbe fuit. Plus palmae est illos inter vol isse placere, Inter quos minor est displicuisse pudor. The Ocean maine his vertues knowes, and Thule witnesse will, And all the fertile fields likewise, that Britans fierce doe till. Where ever Rulers power by turnes successive bridled is, Of much good love continuall increase he doth not misse. That part indeed divided was from all the world beside, And yet as if in mids thereof it were, he did it guide. The greater prise and praise it is to seeke there for to please, Where to controll lesse feare it were, lesse bashment to displease. When Rome was forced by Alarîcus, Honorius calleth Victorinus home with his army: and forthwith the Britans took armes, and engaging themselves into danger for the safety of themselves, freed their own cities and States from the barbarous people, that waited all opportunities to annoy them. Semblably, that whole maritime tract of Bretagne, little Britaine, or Llydaw. Armorica, and the rest of the Gaulois Provinces, accompanied the Britans, and in like manner delivered themselves, casting out the Roman Presidents, and setting up a certain proper common-wealth at their owne pleasure. This revolt and rebellion of Britaine, Zosimus. together with the French Provinces hapned in the time that Constantine usurped the Kingdome, considering that the Barbarians, taking advantage of his negli∣gence in government, boldly, and without restraint overcame those Provinces. How∣beit within a while after, the States of Britan importuned Honorius for succor: whom he without sending any aid at all, advised by his Letters to stand upon their owne guard, & look to themselves. The Britans upon the receit of Honorius Letters, were stirred up, and put themselves in armes to defend their owne cities: but being not a∣ble to match the Barbarians that came upon them so on every side, they besought Honorius what they could, Histor. Miscel. and obtained at his hands, that a Legion should bee sent to their rescue and succour. Which being come over hither, defeated and overthrew a great number of the enemies, chased the rest out of the marches of the Province, and took order for a wall or rampier of turfe to be made, from the Eirth of Edenburgh, unto Cluid, which stood them in small or no stead. For by occasion that the said Le∣gion was called backe to the defence of France, the barbarous enemies returne, breake downe with ease the frontier bounds, and in all kind of outrage and crueltie in every place carry, harrie, and make havocke of all. Then were dispatched a second time in lamentable sort Embassadours, with their garments rent, and heads covered with sand (marke the manner of it) for to crave aid of the Romans: unto whom, by the commandement of Valentinian the Third, were appointed certaine regiments of souldiers, Gallio Ra∣vennas. conducted by Gallio of Ravenna, which most valiantly vanquished the Bar∣barians, and in some sort gave comfort to the poore distressed and afflicted Province. They made a wall directly by a straight line, Gildas. and that of stone (not as the other) at the publike charges of the State, and with private mens purses together, joyning with them the miserable Inhabitants, after the wonted manner of building, to wit, traver∣sing along the land Betweene the mouth of Tine and Elen. from one Sea to another, betweene those cities which haply were pla∣ced there for feare of enemies; to the fearefull people they gave good instructions, and exhor∣tations to play the men, and left unto them paternes, shewing them how to make armour and weapons. Vpon the coast also of the Ocean, in the tract of the South countrey, what way they had ships (because even from that side also they stood in feare of those barbarous and savage beasts) they planted turrets, and bulwarkes with convenient spaces distant one from another, yielding farre and faire prospect into the sea: and so the Romans gave them a finall farewell, never to returne againe. Now was the State every where in a most wofull and pitious plight to see unto: to see the Empire drooping with extreme age, lay along maimed, dismembred, and as it were, benummed in all the limmes and parts thereof: the Church likewise most grievously assailed by Heretikes (who amid the burning broiles of warre, cast and spread their venome all abroad. Among whom Pelagius borne in this Island, taught here, Sigebert to the prejudice of Gods meere grace, That we might attaine to perfect righteous∣nesse by our owne works. One Timothie also, impiously disputed among the Britains, Anno 428. against the divine and humane nature both, in Christ. Now also was the Roman Empire in Britaine, come to her full and finall period, to wit, the foure hundreth, seventie, and sixth yeare after Caesars first entrie: The English-Saxon-Chro∣nicle. what time, in the raigne of Valentinian the Third, the Romans having transported their forces with the foresaid Gallion, for the defence of France, and buried their treasure within the ground, left Britaine bereft of her youth, wasted with so many musters and levies, dispoiled of all succour and defence of garrison, unto the cruell rage of Picts and Scots. Hence it is, that Prosper Aquitanus wrote thus, and that right truely: At this time, by reason of the Romans weakenesse, the strength of Britaine was utterly spent, and brought to nought. And our Historiographer of Malmesburie: When the Tyrants had left none in the countrey, but halfe Barbarians; none in the cities and townes, but such as wholly gave themselves to belly-cheere: Britaine destitute of all protection by her vigorous young men, bereaved of all exercise and practise of good arts, became exposed, for a long time, to the greedy, and gaping jawes of Nations confining upon her. For, straightwaies, by the incursions of Scots and Picts, many a man was slaine, villages burnt, cities undermined and subverted, and throughout all laid wast with fire and sword. The Islanders in great trouble and perplexitie, thinking all other meanes safer, than triall by battell; partly be∣tooke them to their heeles, and for their safetie fled unto the mountaine-Countrey: partly, after they had buried their treasure within the ground, whereof much is digged up in these daies, Yei called Gaule. purposed to goe to Rome for to crave aide. But as Nicephorus truely wrote, Valen∣tinian the Third, was not onely unable to recover Britaine, Spaine, and France, provinces plucked away from his Empire already, but also lost Africke beside. Not without just cause therefore Gildas in this age cried out thus: Britaine was dispoiled of all her armed men, her militarie forces, her Rulers (cruell though they were,) and of a mightie number of her stout and couragious youths. For, besides those whom that Usurper Maximus, and the last Constantine led away with them, it appeareth evidently by antike Inscriptions, and the booke named Notitia Provinciarum, that these companies underwritten served the Romans in war, here and there dispersed over their Provinces, which also were from time to time evermore supplied out of Britaine. Ala Britannica Milliaria. Ala IIII Britonum in Aegypto. Cohors Prima Aeliae Britonum. Cohors III. Britonum. Cohors VII. Britonum. Cohors XXVI. Britonum in Armenia. Britanniciani sub Magistro peditum. Invicti juniores Britanniciani inter auxilia Palatina. Exculcatores jun. Britan. Britones cum Magistro Equitum Galliarum, Invicti Iuniores Britones intra Hispanias. Britones Seniores in Illyrico. Hereupon, no maruaile it is, if Britaine exhausted daily with so many, and so great levies of souldiers, lay exposed unto the Barbarians, and heereby proveth that sen∣tence of Tacitus true; There is no strength in the Roman armies, but it is of forraine strangers. In writing of these matters, concerning the Romans government in Britaine, which continued (as I said) CCCCLXXVI. yeares, or much there about, whiles I consider and think otherwhiles with my selfe, how many Colonies of Romans were in so long a time brought hither, how many souldiers continually transported over hither from Rome to lie in garrison, How the Bri∣tans are de∣scended from the Trojans. how many sent hither to negotiate either their own busines, or the affaires of the Empire, who joyning in mariage with Britans, both planted them∣selves, and also begat children here (For, Wheresoever the Roman winneth, saith Se∣neca, there he woneth, and inhabiteth:) I enter oft times into this cogitation, That Britans may more truely ingraffe themselves into the Trojans stocke, by these Ro∣mans, who are descended from Trojans, than either the The people of Auergne in France. Arverni, who drawing their descent, from Trojan. Ilian bloud, have named themselves, the Romans brethren; or the Mamertines, Burgundi∣ans. Hedui, and the rest, who grounding upon a fabulous originall, have fathered themselves upon the Trojans. For Rome, that common Mother (as he saith) called those her Citizens, Quos domuit, nexu{que} pio longinqua revinxit: Whom she subdued, and by a gracious knot, United people farre dissite and remote. And meet it is we should beleeve, that the Britans and Romans in so many ages, by a blessed and joyfull mutuall ingraffing, Tacit. Histor. lib. 4. as it were, have growne into one stocke and nation: seeing, that the Those of Colein, and thereabout. Ubij in Germanie within 28. yeares after that a Colo∣nie was planted, where now Colein is, made answer as touching the Roman Inhabi∣tants there, in this wise: This is the naturall Countrey, as well to those that being conveied hither in times past, are conjoyned with us by mariages, as to their off-spring. Neither can we thinke you so unreasonable, as to wish us for to kill our parents, brethren, and chil∣dren. If the Ubij and Romans in so small a time became parents, brethren, and children one to another, Ammian. Marcellin. sib. 28. what should we judge of Britans and Romans linked and conjoyned so many yeares together? What also may we say of the Burgundians, who for that they mingled their bloud with the Romans, whiles they held for a small time the Ro∣mans Provinces, called themselves a Roman off-spring: not to rehearse againe what I have said before, That this Island hath beene named Romania, and Insulae Romana, that is, The Roman Isle. Thus much have I set downe summarily, and in compendious manner gathered out of the ancient monuments of Antiquitie, rejecting all fabulous fictions, as touching the Romans Regiment in Britaine, their Lieutenants, Propretours, Presidents, Deputies. Vi∣cars, and Regents. Rectors. But more exactly and fully, [might I have done it] if Ausonius had performed his promise, and that come unto our hands: who said, he would rec∣kon up such, as Aut Italûm populos Aquilonigenas{que} Britannos Praefecturarum titulo tenuere secundo. That ruled Nations Italike, and North-bred Britans all, Entituled with happy stile, Lieutenants Generall. But seeing it is agreed upon among all learned men, that there ariseth very much light to the illustration of ancient Histories, out of ancient Coines, I have thought good in this place to exhibite unto the Reader certaine pieces of money, as well of those Britaines, who first came under subjection of the Romans, as of Roman Em∣perours; such especially as appurtaine to Britaine, and those out of the Cabinet of the right Worshipfull Sir Robert Cotton of Conington Knight, who hath from all places with curious and chargeable search, gotten them together, and of his courtesie with heart and good will, imparted the same unto me. CONIECTVRES AS TOV∣ching the British Coines. T O the Britans Coines, the portracts whereof I have here shewed, you looke haply, that I should adjoyne some briefe notes also. But what to adjoyne of such things as the revolution of so many ages past, hath altogether over∣cast with darkenesse, to professe plainely, I see not: and your selfe, when you shall read these slender guesses of mine, will avouch with me, that I walke in a mirke and mistie night of ignorance. That the old Britans used brasse money, or rings, or else plates of yron tried to a certaine just weight, I have declared already before, out of Caesar: and there be, who averre, that they have seen some of these found in little pitchers. Besides these, found there are other∣whiles in this Island, pieces of gold, silver, and brasse of sundry fa∣shions, and as different in poize: all for the most part of the one side hollow: some without letters, others with expresse Inscriptions of letters; of which sort, I could never here that any have been digged up elsewhere, untill such time as Nicolaus Fabricius Pierescius, a right noble young Gentleman of Provance in France, one for such anti∣quities, & old Medals or pieces of money, passing skilfull, and of ju∣dicious insight, very lately had shewed me the like found in France. But to come unto these of ours, which I have here proposed. The first, is a coine of Cunobelinus, who flourished in the daies of Augustus and Tiberius: wherein, if I deceive not my selfe, are en∣graven the heads of two-faced Ianus: peradventure, because even at that time Britaine began to cast off, and leave their barbarous rude∣nesse. For we reade, how Ianus was the first, that changed barbarous manners into civill behaviour, and therefore was depainted with two fore-heads, to signifie, that he had of one shape made another. The second also is Cunobelinus Coine, shewing his face, and In∣scription [of the one side] and the Coiner or Mint-master on the o∣ther, with this word TASCIA set to it, TASCIA. which word among the Britans, betokeneth a Tribute Penye, as Master David Powell, a man most skilfull in the British language hath informed me: and is de∣rived perhaps of the Latine, Taxatio. For, the Britans acknowledge not X. for their letter. And by the same reason the Inscription of MONETA, is seene oft times in pieces of Roman money. In like manner, the third is a Coine of the same Cunobelinus, with an horse and CVNO. with a corne eare also, and CAMV, (as it should seeme) for Camalodunum, See in Essex. which was the Royall citie and seat of Cunobelinus. The fourth with VER, See in Hart∣ford-shire. may be thought a coine of the Verlamians. The fifth againe, is one of Cunobelinus his pieces. The sixth, because it giveth no light by letters, I wot not what to make of it. The seventh, a Coine of Cunobelinus, having this Inscription, TASC. NOVANEL, with a womans head; whether it should imply a tribute piece of the Trinovants, over whom he was ruler, I cannot avow on the other side, Apollo with his Harpe, and Cunobe∣lin putteth me in remēbrance of that, which elsewhere I have obser∣ved as concerning the God Belinus : God Belinus. namely, that the Ancient In∣habitants of France. Gauls in old time worshipped Apollo under the name of Belinus : which Diosco∣rides also doth confirme, writing in plain & expresse termes, that the herbe Henbane. Apollinaris, with the juce whereof the Gaules were wont to annoint their arrowes, is in the Gaules tongue, called Belinuntia. So that, upon this I may be bold in some sort to conject, that the name of Cunobelinus, as also of Cassibelinus, is drawn from the worship of Apollo, like as the names of Phoebitius and Delphidius. If not rather, like as Apollo for his bush of yellow haire, is named in Greeke, in Latin, Flavus, that is, yellow : so likewise among the Britans, and Gaules, Belin. For that which is yellow, in Welch. British speech they call, Melin, Belin, and Felin: and for the same cause, that ancient Belinus, Cunobelinus, and Cassibelinus, who also goeth under the name of Cas∣sivelaunus, may seeme to be so named, Cuno. as one would say, Yellow Prin∣ces. For that Cuno is a name of dignitie, the Welchmen. Britans confesse, and a thing which is especiall and principall, they terme at this day, Cynoc. Certes, it hath been a name of honour, Cungetorix, Cunobelinus, Cu∣neglasus, Vitrei coloris. Cuneda, and Cunedagius, Princes names among the Bri∣tans; like as Cyngetorix, Convictolitanus, and Conetodunus, among the ancient Gaules, doe after a sort make good and declare. Neither am I ignorant that Gildas hath translated Cuneglasus, in Latine, Lanio∣nemfulvum vel furvum, that is, A Lion tawney, or darke hued Butcher : whom others have interpreted, Principem Caeruleum, sive vitrei colo∣ris, that is, A Prince blew, or of a blewish, or woad-colour: like as Cuneda, Principem bonum, that is, A good Prince. That the Germans Koning, and our King, came from Cuno, I dare not yet suppose. Let it suffice, by these my sundry guesses, to have thus dallied, lest I lay open my selfe to the scorne of others. The eighth, with a chariot horse, and a wheele or shield under∣neath, having in the reverse BODVO; may seeme to be a Coine of the Nation called Or Dabuni, Glocester∣shire, and Oxford-shire. Boduni : or else of the Queene Bodicia, who is diversly named Voadicia, and Bunduica. The ninth, wherein is represented an horseman, with speare and shield, and these letters in scattering wise, CAERATIC. I would deeme to be a Coine of that warlike Prince Caratacus, whose prai∣ses Tacitus highly extolleth. The tenth, upon the one side whereof, Of Arras. under an horseman, is the Inscription REX, and on the other COM, both I and some others are pleased with this conceit, that it was a coin of Connius Or Gallena, that is, Wal∣lengford. Attre∣batensis whom Caesar mentioneth. The eleventh, which doth represent a little halfe moon with this Inscription, REX CALLE, is not much unlike the name of that most famous and frequented Citie, Callena. The twelfth hath a winged head with this word ATEVLA: and in the reverse a Lion, and this Inscription, VLATOS. What the meaning might be of these words, I seeke and seek, but in vaine. Indeed by this very same portrature and image, I have seene upon pieces of Roman mony the Goddesse Victorie expressed. But, that Victorie should bee in the British tongue called Ateula, Victoria. Andate. I never yet could find. Mary, that they named Victorie, Andata, I have out of Dio reported already: and whether the same were Andrata, worshipped of the Those of the County of Beaufort. Vocontij in Gaule, let some other say, for I dare not. Here also may you behold the thirteenth, In Octago∣no. with this word DIAS, in an eight-angled figure, & an horse on the contrary side: the four∣teenth with a swine, and these letters VANOC, the head also of a goddesse, haply Venus ; or else Venutius whom Tacitus speaketh of. The fifteenth, with an head and helmet upon it, and this Inscription, DVRNACO: People of Anjou or Angiers. and whether that were Dumnacus a Prince of the Andes whom Caesar doth mention, I wot not. The sixteenth with an horse, & this word ORCETI. The seventeenth with the image of Augustus and TASCIA; & on the reverse a bull boaking with his hornes: The eighteenth, with CVNO within a laurell garland: and upon the back part an horse, with the Inscription TASCE. We have seen besides one other coine with the flying horse Pega∣sus, and CAMV: on the backe part whereof, the forme of a man with an helmet and shield, within standing corne, and CVNO: another, with an horse ill favouredly portraied, and EISV, perad∣venture for ISVRII, and on the back side, an eare of corne: also an∣other with a souldier carying a speare, and on the other side, within a wreath or chein, SOLIDV. That it should be the piece of mony called Solidus, I doe not believe; because the said piece was in that age alwaies of gold, whereas this was of silver. More probable it is, that it should have a reference to Solidurij. Solidurij. Caesar Com∣ment. For so the ancient French named men devoted to die in behalfe of others: Whose condition was this, that look unto whose friendship they had betaken them∣selves, they should together with them enjoy all the comforts and commodities of this life. If any violent accident hapned unto them, they were either to sustaine the same chance together with them, or else to kill themselves: neither hath ever any one of them bin found, who after the party was slain, unto whose friēdship he had devoted himselfe, Soldiers. would refuse to die. Now whether from these, those soul∣diers tooke their name, who being sworne pensioners to any one Prince or State, take a certaine pension, and with most nations of Europe carry almost the very same name, to wit Soldiers, Soldates, Soldados, &c. I had rather others should thinke than my selfe deter∣mine: although for mine owne part, I would more willingly sub∣scribe to this opinion, that in these later and more moderne times, they were termed Solidarij, for distinction sake, for those, who ser∣ved in the wars in regard of their tenours, without pay of mony. Whether all these kinds of coine went commonly currant as mo∣ney, from one to another and in ordinary trafficke and exchange, or were stamped at the first apart, for some speciall use and purpose, is a question debated among the learned. But in few words, take here my conjecture, if I may be so bold to interpose the same. Conside∣ring that Caesar had appointed what Custome or Impost the Britans should pay yearely, and whereas under Augustus they endured those paiments for portage, or toll, as well in carrying forth as bringing in commodities: by little and little other tributes also were imposed upon them: Strabo. to wit, for Sativis. Corne-grounds, Plant-plots, Groves or Parks, Pasturage of greater and smaller beasts: as being subdued now to o∣bey as subjects, and not to serve as slaves: I have been of opinion, that those pieces of mony were stamped at first for that use; namely, for greater beasts, with an horse; for smaller with a swine; for woods with a tree; for Appian. corne-fields with an eare of corne: as in that piece of the Verlamians, which carieth the Inscription VERV. As for those with the head of a man or woman, they may seeme stamped for the Tribute Pol-silver. Capitatio, which was personall and im∣posed upon the poll or person of every one: of women from the twelfth, of men, from the fourteenth yeare of their age. Which im∣position Bunduica or Bodicia a Queene of the Britans complaineth of unto her people in these words; Yee doe both graze and also plough for the Romans, yea, ye pay an yearly tribute in respect of your very bodies. For this purpose I have thought there was in old time one certaine kind of mony stamped, seeing that in the scripture it is plainly called Numisma Census, Numisma Census. and Hesichius expoundeth Cen∣sus, is a kind of personall mony paid for every poll. And the more sted∣fastly believe I this, for that in some there is expressed the Mint-ma∣ster marking mony with TASCIA, which among the Britans betokeneth a Tribute-Denier. Howbeit I denie not, but that after∣wards these passed promiscuously as mony from one to another. Neither am I yet of the same mind with those, that would have the Swine, the Horse, the Corne eare, Ianus, &c. to have beene the pe∣culiar badges of nations, families, or Princes: considering, we may see in these, that one and the same Prince and nation used sundry badges, as Cunobelinus, who stamped in his mony a swine, an horse, a corne eare, and other things. Now, whether these tribute pieces were coined by the Romans, or the Provinciall people, or their Kings, seing that the whole world was taxed by Augustus, I may not easily affirme. Conjecture I may that they were stamped by the British Kings, considering that Bri∣taine from the time of Iulius Caesar unto Claudius daies, used their owne lawes, and was committed to the government of their owne Kings, as Dio writeth: and withall, seeing that they represent the images and titles of British Princes. For, the Romans by a received custome had Kings in their Provinces as instruments to bring the people into servitude▪ who being now become, as it were, the Ro∣mans fellowes and associates, by little & little were framed, (a thing usuall with persons conquered) to their fashions, & so, as it seemeth, began after the Roman manner both to stamp mony at a certaine poize, and also to imprint a name upon the pieces. But contrariwise in Iurie, as may be collected by the answer of Christ, marked they were with Caesars face and superscription, and that in all likelihood by the Romans themselves. Which Cardinall Baronius a painefull Ecclesiasticall Historian, sheweth in these words: The manner, saith he, among the Romans was, that mony should be coined by the Emperours, in regard of Tribute or Taxe, and not to remaine alwaies the same, and af∣ter one sort, but according to the rise and fall of the said tributes, differ from other pieces of usuall mony in this point, for that the value of these or∣dinarie pieces is alwaies one and the same, but those of Tax or tribute, ever as the qualitie of Tribute changed, were made proportionable to the said tribute. But divers learned men accord not in this point with Ba∣ronius. NOTES VPON THE ROMAN COINES. T HE first Roman Emperour after [Iulius] Caesar, that earnestly set his mind upon the conquest of Britaine, was Claudius: and he having put over sea hither with an armie, brought the South-part thereof into the forme of a Province: At which ve∣ry time, this first piece of mony may seeme to bee stamped, which carrieth this abbreviated Inscription, TI CLAVD. CAES. AVG. P. M. TR. P. VIIII. IMP, XVI. that is to say, Ti∣berius Claudius Caesar, Dio. Cassius. Augustus Pontifex Maximus, that is, High Priest, Tribunitia potestate IX. that is, In Tribunes authoritie the ninth time, Imperator XVI. that is, sixteene times Imperator. But to explaine these titles once for all, ye shall understand, That after Iulius Caesar, who laid the foundation of the Roman Monarchie, and Octavius who was honoured with the name of Augustus, all their successors in honour of them would be called Caesares, and Augusti, as though they far surpassed the nature of men. For such things as be of sacred Majestie, are named Augustae : also, termed they were Pontifices Maximi, or High Priests, for that they were consecrated in all kinds of Priesthood, and overseers of all Sacrifices and religious ceremo∣nies. They usurped likewise the Tribunitian power and authoritie (for Tribunes in no wise would they be termed) to the end, that they might have protection thereby and be inviolable. For, being once invested in this authoritie, if any man either gave cursed lan∣guage or offered violence unto them, hee might without processe of condemnation be killed as a sacrilegious person: and this Tribuni∣tian power they renewed every yeare, and thereby were reckoned the yeares of their Empire. Last of all they were stiled, Imperatores, because their command and rule was most large, & under that name the power of Kings and Dictators was contained. Now, they were entituled, Imperatores, so oft as they had atchieved any worthy ex∣ploit in battell, either in their owne persons, or by their Captaines. But whereas in the reverse of this piece of mony, there is to be seene a triumphall Arch, with the portrait of an horseman betweene two trophees, and this title, DE BRITAN. I would judge, that ther∣by is meant a twofold victorie obtained, in the ninth yeare of Clau∣dius his Empire, according to the number, that sheweth his Tribu∣nitian authoritie renewed. In the second piece, which also is a coine of Claudius The Empe∣rour. Augustus, out of this Inscription, TI. CLAVD. CAES. AVG. GER. TR. P. XII. IMP. XIIX. we are taught, that in the twelfth yeare of his raigne, he, for a victorie won in Britan was with joyfull acclamati∣ons saluted, Imperator, the eighteenth time: and at the same instant that the Colonie Camalodunum was thither brought, which is sig∣nified expressely by an Or Plough∣man. husbandman imprinted upon it, with a Cow and a Bull. The Romans (saith Servius) when they were about to found and build cities, being girt and clad after the Gabine fashion, that is to say, with one part of their gowne covering the head, and the other tuc∣ked up, yoked on the right hand, a Bull, and within forth a Cow, and held the crooked plough taile bending inward, so as all the clods of the earth might fall inward. And thus having made a furrow, they did set out the pla∣ces for wals, holding up the plough fro the ground, wher the gates should be. The Son of Claudius, whose piece of coine the third is with Greek Characters, was by vertue of an act of Senate, adorned with the sur∣name of BRITANNICVS, in regard of his fathers fortunate wars, that he might use the same as his owne proper addition. He it was, for whom Seneca praied in this wise, That he might appease Ger∣manie, make way into Britaine, and solemnize both his Fathers triumphs, and also new [of his owne.] But what should bee the meaning of an halfe ship in this coine, with this Inscription, Metropolis Etiminij Regis? Certes, I cannot for certaine affirme who that Etiminius was, unlesse a man list to imagine him to have beene the very same Adi∣minius, King Cunobelinus son, of whom Suetonius reporteth, That he ran away unto C. Caligula. That which you see in the fourth place, is a piece of Hadrians mo∣ny, with this writing upon it, HADRIANVS AVG. CONSVL III. PATER PA∣TRIAE. And in the other side, EXERCITVS BRITANNICVS, that is, The Armie in Britaine represented by three souldiers. I would deeme, that it betokened the three Legions, to wit, Secunda Augusta, Sexta victrix, and Vicessima Victrix, which served in Britaine, Anno Christi 120. For then was he Consul the third time. The fifth and sixth, which are the coines of Antoninus Pius, car∣rying this Inscription, Antoninus Pius, Pater Patriae, Tribunitia pote∣state, Consul tertiùm: and in their reverse, the one having Britaine sitting upon rocks with a militarie Ensigne, a speare and a shield; the other, the selfe same Britaine, sitting upon a globe; seeme to have beene stamped by the Province Britaine, in honour of Antoninus Pius, when he began his Empire in the yeare of Christ 140. As for that militarie habit of the Province Britan, it signifieth, That Britan in those daies flourished in glory of martiall prowesse: like as that piece of mony, which at the same time Italie stamped for the honor of him, hath such another figure sitting upon a globe, with Cornu-co∣piae, betokening plentie of all things: that also which Sieilie coined, hath the like figure with an eare of corne, in token of fruitfulnesse: semblably that which Mauritania stamped hath a portraict or per∣sonage, holding two speares with an horse, to shew the glory of that Province in good horsemanship and chivalrie. Hitherto also is to be referred the ninth, which is a piece of the same Antoninus, but not set in his due place. The seventh piece of mony, stamped by Commodus, sheweth no more, but that he for a victorie against the Britans, assumed into his stile the name of BRITANNICVS: for in the other side there∣of is to be seen, Victory, with a branch of the Date-tree, holding a shield, and sitting upon the shield of the Britans vanquished, with this inscription, VICTORIA BRITANNICA. The eighth, which is a coine of Caracalla, and set here not in the right place, more expresly sheweth by the numerall figures, that hee vanquished his enemies in Britaine, in the yeare of our Salvation, 214. as also by the Trophee, which Virgil better than any engraver, portraied in these verses, Ingentem quercum decisis undi{que} ramis Constituit tumulo, fulgentiá que induit arma Mezenti ducis exuvias, tibi magne trophaeum Bellipotens: aptat roranteis sanguine cristas, Teláque trunca viri. A mightie Oke, the boughs whereof were shred from every side, Vpon an hill he pight, whereon he goodly armour tide Duke Mezence spoiles, a trophee brave, ô mightie Mars, to thee, And fits therto his crests which yet with gore bloud dropping be, The truncheons of that Knight also — The same is to be thought of the twelfth, which also is one of the same Caracallaes. But in those of Severus and Geta, there is none obscuritie at all. Who this Aebianus was, I am not yet fully resolved. Some reckon him to be A. Pomponius Aelianus, one of the 30. Or Vsurpers. Tyrants. Others will him to be Cl. Aelianus, one of the sixe Tyrants under Dioclesian. There are also that thinke he was the very same Or Vsurper. Tyrant in Britain, under the Emperour Probus, of whom Zosimus made mention, but suppressed his name, and of whom I have written before. Surely, in what time soever he lived, we suppose that in Britaine hee was na∣med Augustus, considering his pieces of money bee found in this Island onely, Others read Laelianus. carrying this Inscription, IMPERATOR CL. AELIANVS PIVS FOELIX AVGVSTVS. In the re∣verse, there is to be read, VICTORIA AVGVSTI, which betokeneth, that he subdued some Barbarians. The coine of Carausius, with this Inscription, Imperator Caius Carausius Pius Foelix Augustus, and in the backside thereof, PAX AVGVSTI, seemeth to have beene stamped at the very time when hee had quieted the British Sea, which by reason of rovers was so dangerous. When Allectus, who made away Carausius, had put on the Im∣periall purple, and fought manfully against the Barbarians, he stam∣ped this piece with VIRTVS AVGVSTI. As for the Letters Q. L. some would have them to signifie a A kind of coine. Quartarius, stamped at London; others, The Questor, that is, Treasurer of London. When as Constantius Chlorus, being departed this life at Yorke, was now solemnly consecrated, and after the Pagan manner deifi∣ed, in honour and memoriall of him was this piece of money stam∣ped: which appeareth evidently by the Inscription, and a Temple betweene two Eagles. these letters underneath P. LON. doe plainely imply Pecuniam Londini, that is, that the said money was stamped at London. His wife Flavia Helena, a British Ladie borne, as our histories report, and as that most excellent Historiographer Baronius doth confirme, what time as her Sonne Constantius Maximus had dis∣comfited the Tyrant Maxentius, and received these Titles, Fundator quietis, that is, The founder of quietnesse : and Liberator Orbis, that is, The Deliverer of the world, having procured securitie to the State and common-weale, had this piece stamped in honour of him at Triers, as appeareth by the Letters S. TR. that is, Treveris. Signata Treviris, that is to say, coined at Triers. Flavius Canstantinus Maximus Augustus, the great ornament of Britaine, stamped this coine at Constantinople, as we are taught by these characters underneath, CONS. with this, GLORIA EX∣ERCITVS, that is, The glory of the Armie, to currie favour with the souldiers, in whose choice in those daies, and not at the dispose of the Emperour, was the soveraigne rule and government. Constantinus the younger, Son of that Constantinus Maximus, unto whom with other countries the Province Britaine befell; stamped this piece while his Father lived. For he is called only No∣bilis Caesar, a title that was wont to be given to the Heires apparant, or elect Successours of the Empire. By the edifice thereon, and these words, PROVIDENTIAE CAESS. we understand, that he together with his brother, built some publike worke, like as by these letters P. LON. that this piece of mony was coined at London. This coine carrying the Inscription, Dominus noster Magnentius Pius Foelix Augustus, may seeme to have beene stamped by Magnen∣tius, who had a Britan to his father: as also to win the favour of Constantius, after hee had put to flight some publike enemie. For, these Characters DD. NN. AVGG. that is, Our LORDS AV∣GVSTI, doe argue there were then two Augusti, or Emperours. And as for that Inscription, VOTIS V. MVLTIS X. it beto∣keneth, that the people at that time did nuncupate their vowes in these termes, That the Emperour might flourish 5. yeares, and by du∣pling the said number of 5. with lucky acclamations praied for ma∣ny 10. yeares. And hereto accordeth that speech in the Panegyrick o∣ration of Nazarus, as followeth: The Solemnized every fifth yeare. Quinquennall feasts and so∣lemnities of the most blessed and happy Caesars, hold us wholly possessed with joyes; but in the appointed revolutions of ten yeares, our hastning vowes and swift hopes have now rested. The letters P. AR. doe shew that this denier was stamped at Arles. Arelate. Constantius having defeated Magnentius, and recovered Britaine, in honour of his armie, caused this to be stamped. The letter R. in the basis thereof importeth haply, that it came out of the mint which was at Rome. In honour of Valentinian, when hee had set upright againe the state of Britaine which was falling to ruine, and called that part of it by him thus recovered after his own name Valentia, this piece was coined at Antiochia, as may be gathered out of the small let∣ters underneath. Vnto the Denier of Gratianus, I can think of nothing to say more, save only that which erewhile I noted upon that of Magnentius. What time as Magnus Maximus was by the British armie created Augustus, and his son likewise Flavius Victor named Caesar, to grace and glorifie the souldiers were these pieces coined: and Theodo∣sius having subdued and made them away, for the very same cause, stamped that with this, VIRTVTE EXERCITVS. Vpon that golden piece of Honorius, I have nothing to observe, but that by this Inscription, AVGGG. there were at the same time three Emperours. Augusti : namely after the yeare of Grace 420. when as Ho∣norius ruled as Emperour in the west, Theodosius the younger in the East, and with them Constantius, by Honorius nominated Augustus, who had vanquished our Constantine, elected in hope of that for∣tunate name. As for that Inscription CONOB, it signifieth, that it was fine and pure gold, stamped at Constantinople. For that same CONOB, is no where read, so farre as ever I could hitherto ob∣serve, but in pieces of Gold, for CONSTANTINOPOLI OBRIZVM. I could annex hereunto many more pieces of Roman mony, for infinite store of them is every where found among us in the ruines of cities and townes subverted, D. 1. c. de auri pub. proscent L. 12. 13. C. The de suscept. praepos. in treasure coffers, or vaults hidden in that age, as also in funerall-pots and pitchers. And how it came to passe, that there should remaine still so great plenty of them, I much marvelled, untill I had read in the Constitutions of Princes, that it was forbidden to melt such ancient coines. Having now already represented these antike pieces, as well of British as Roman mony in their owne formes, I thinke it also profi∣table for the Reader to insert in this very place a chorographicall table or mappe of Britaine, (seeing it hath sometime beene a Pro∣vince of the Romans) with the ancient names of places▪ and al∣though the same be not exact and absolute, (for who is able to per∣forme that?) yet thereby a man may learne thus much, if nothing else, that in this round Globe of the earth, there is daily some change: new foundations of townes and cities are laid; new names of peo∣ple and nations arise, and the former utterly be abolished: and, as that Poet said, Non indignemur mortalia corpora solvi, Cernimus exemplis oppida posse mori. Why fret should we that mortall men to death doe subject lie? Examples daily shew that townes and cities great may die. THE DOVVN-FALL OR DESTRV∣CTION OF BRITAINE. W Hen as Britaine now was abandoned of the Roman garrisons, there ensued an universall and utter confusion, full of woefull miseries and calamities, what with barbarous nations of the one side making incursions and invasions, what with the native Inhabitants raising tumultuous uprores on the other, whiles every man catcheth at the government of State. Thus, as Ninnius writeth, They lived in feare 40. yeares or thereabout. For, Vortigern then King, stood in great dread of the Picts and Scots: Troubled sore also he was with the violence of Romans, that remai∣ned heere, and no lesse stood he in feare of Ambrosius Aurelius or Aureleanus, who during the conflict of these tempestuous troubles, wherein his parents that had worne the Imperiall purple roabe, were slaine, survived them. Gilda. Hereupon, the Saxons, whom Vortigern had called forth of Germany to aid him, made bloudy and deadly warre against those friends that invited and entertained them: insomuch as after many variable and doubtfull events of warre they wholly disseised the poore wretched Bri∣taines of the more fruitfull part of the Island, Saxons called forth into Britaine. and their ancient native seat and habitation. But this most lamentable ruine and downfall of Britaine, Gildas the Britaine, who lived within a little while after, all full of teares shall with his piteous pen depaint or deplore rather unto you. As the Romans were returning, quoth he, to their owne home, there shew themselves avie, Carroghes. Scitick vale. out of their carroghes, wherein they passed over the The Irish sea. Sciticke vale, and as it were, at high noone. Sunne. and in fervent heat, issuing from out of most nar∣row holes and caves, whole swarmes of duskish vermin, to wit, a number of hideous high∣land Scots and Picts in flocks, This Gildas here in the Manuscript Copies of France is na∣med Querulis as the right worrhy Barnabas Brisonius hath reported unto me. for manners and conditions in some respect different; but sor∣ting well enough in one and the same greedy desire of bloud-shed: Who having intelligence that the Roman associats and Maintainers of the Britans were returned home, with utter dis∣claiming and renouncing of all return, more confidently than their usuall manner had beene, seize into their hands all the Northern and utmost part of the land, and hold the same, (as na∣turall inborne Inhabitants) even as far as to the wall. Against these attempts opposed there was and placed upon an high fort and castle along the wall a garrison, nothing war-like, unfit for fight, with quaking hearts and altogether unmeet for service: which warding there day and night became lazie with doing nothing. Meane while, no stay there was, but those bare naked enemies approached the forts and wall with hooked weapons and engines, where∣with the most miserable people were plucked from the walles and dashed against the hard ground. This good yet did this manner of hasting untimely death, unto those that by such meanes were speedily rid out of the world, in that by so quick a dispatch they escaped and avoided the wofull imminent calamities of their brethren and deare children. To bee short, having abandoned their Cities and quit that high-wall, once againe they tooke them to flight, and were dispersed anew, in more desperate manner than before time. Semblably, the ene∣mies follow hard in chase, and hasten to make fouler havocke and more cruell butcherie of them. Like therefore as Lambs by bloudy butchers, so are these wofull Inhabitants quartred and mangled by their enemies: insomuch as their abode among them might well be compared to the ravening of wild and savage beasts. For not only the poore and wretched people them∣selves forbeare not to rob one another, for their short sustenance of small food, but also those hostile outward miseries and calamities were augmented with inward tumults and troubles: in that by these and such like pillages and spoiles practised so thicke, the whole country was ex∣haust of victuals the staffe and strength of life, save onely the small comfort that came by hunting. In some Co∣pies, AGI∣TIVS, in other Equi∣tius Cos. with∣out any num∣ber. Whereupon the distressed remaines of them send their missive letters againe unto Aetius a power-able man in the Roman state, in this tune; To * AETIVS THRICE CONSVLL. THE GRONES OF BRITANS. The Barbarians drive us backe to the sea: The sea againe putteth us backe upon Barbarians. Thus betweene tweene two kinds of death, either our throats be cut, or we are drowned: Yet obtaine they no succour at all for those their distresses. Meane while in this wandring and declining condition of theirs, most notorious and horrible famine op∣presseth them, which forced many of them without delay, to yield themselves into the hands of those cruell spoilers and robbers, that they might have some food (were it never so little) to comfort and refresh their poore hungry soules: but with others it ne∣ver wrought so much, but they chose rather to withstand and rise against them con∣tinually, from out of the very mountaines, caves and thick woods, full of bushes, briers and brambles. And then verily, at the first they gave sundry overthrowes with much slaughter to their enemies for many yeares together (as they made spoile and drave a∣way booties in the land), reposing their trust not in man, but in God: according to that saying of Philo, The helpe of God is at hand when mans helpe faileth. Thus for a while rested our enemies from their boldnesse; but yet our countrymen gave not over their wickednesse: The enemies, I say, retired from the people, but the people did not retire themselves from their wickednesse. For, an usuall manner it ever was of this na∣tion (like as it is at this day also) to shew themselves feeble in repressing the enemies forces, but strong enough to civill warres, and to undergoe the burdens of sinne, &c. Well then, these shamelesse Irish ravenours returne home, minding shortly after to make repaire hither againe: and the Picts rested without molestation then first; and so from thenceforth, in the utmost part of the Province, yet not without wasting & har∣rying the country at sundry times. By meanes therefore of such surcease of hostility, the desolate peoples sore of famin was healed up clean and skinned, but another more virulent than it, secretly bred and brake forth. For, in the time that the Island was free from hostile wasting, there happened it in so fruitfull plenty and abundance of all things, as the like no age before had ever remembred: and therewith groweth ever∣more all manner of riot and excesse. For, so mightily it encreased and came to so great an head, that very fitly at the same time it might be said, Certainely it is hard, that there is such fornication, as the like is not among the Gentiles. And not this sinne onely was rife, but all others also that are incident to mans nature: and especially (which likewise at this very day overturneth the state of all goodnesse in it) the hatred of Truth, and the maintai∣ners thereof, the love also of lies with the forgers thereof, the admitting of evill for good, the respective regard of leawdnesse in stead of goodnesse, desire of darkenesse in lieu of the Sun∣light, and accepting of Satan for an Angell of light. Kings anoin∣ted. Kings were annointed not by God, but by such as were knowne more cruell than the rest: and soone after, the same were mur∣dered by their owne anointers, without due examination of the truth, and others more fierce and cruell elected. Now if any one of these Kings seemed more mild than other, and some∣what better inclined to the Truth, upon him as the the subverter of Britaine the hatred and spitefull darts of all men without respect were levelled and shot. No difference made they of any thing that they tooke displeasure at, but things weighed all in equall ballance, saving that the better things indeed wrought ever discontent: in so much as, right justly the say∣ing of the Prophet which was denounced unto that people in old time might bee applied unto our country, Yee lawlesse and corrupt children have forsaken the Lord, and provoked unto wrath the holy one of Israel: Why should ye be smitten any more, still multiplying iniquitie? Every head is sicke, and every heart is heavy. From the sole of the foot unto the crowne of the head there is nothing sound therein. Thus did they all things that were contrary to their safe∣tie, as if no phisicke or medicine had been bestowed upon the world by the true phisician of all. And not onely the secular or lay men did this, but also the selected flocke of the Lord and the shepheards thereof, who ought to have given example to the whole people. To speake of drunkennesse, numbers of them drenched, as it were, with wine, lay benummed and sense∣lesse: possessed they were with swelling pride, and therewith stomackfull, given to contentious brawles, armed with the catching clawes of envie, and undiscreet in their judgement, as putting no difference betweene good and evill. Insomuch as, apparantly (even as now a daies) it seemed that contempt was poured forth upon the Princes▪ and the people were se∣duced by their vanities and errour in by paths and not led the right way. In the meane time, when God was minded to purge his family and to recure it thus infected with so great cor∣ruption of sinnes, by hearesay onely of tribulation, the winged flight (as one would say) of an headlesse rumour, pierceth the attentive eares of all men, giving notice of ancient enemies ready to arrive, and upon their comming fully minded to destroy them utterly, and after their wonted manner to possesse and inhabite the countrey from one end to another. Yet for all this were they never the better, but like unto foolish and senselesse horses, resisting the bridle of reason, and refusing to admit the bit (as they say) into their close shut mouth, leaving the way to salvation, narrow though it were, ran up and downe at randum all in the broad way of all wickednesse which leadeth directly and readily to death. Whiles therefore, as Salomon saith, the obstinate and stubborne servant is not amended with words, scourged hee is for a foole, Pestilence. and feeleth not the whip. For loe, a pestilent contagion bringing much mortalitie fal∣leth heavily upon the foolish people; which in a short space, when the enemies sword was gone destroied so great a multitude of them, as that the living were not able to bury the dead. Neither verily were they the better for it, that the saying of Esay the Prophet might in them also bee fulfilled: And God calleth them, quoth he, to sorrow and mourning, to bald∣nesse and sackcloth; but behold, they fell to killing of calves, to slaying of rams: Lo, they went to eating and drinking, and said withall, Let us eate and drinke, for to morrow wee shall die. And why? the time drew neere wherein their iniquities, like as those in times past of the Amorites, should come to the fulnesse. For, they fall to consult what was the best and most convenient course to be taken, for to represse so cruell, and so many invasions of the forena∣med nations, with the booties which they raised. Then, all the Counsellors together with the proud tyrant become blinded and bewitched, devising such a protection, nay a destruction rather of their country as this; namely, that those most fierce Saxons, a people foully infamous, Saxons recei∣ved into Bri∣taine. odious both to God and man, should be let into this Island, as one would say, wolves into the sheep-folds, to repulse, forsooth, and beat backe the Northern nations. Than which, I assure you, nothing was ever devised and practised more pernicious, nothing more unhappy unto this land. O mist of sense and grossest understanding that ever was! O desperate dul∣nesse and blind blockishnesse of mind! Those whom in their absence they were inclined and given to dread more than very death, now of their owne record these foolish Princes of Egypt entertained, as I may say, under the roofe of one house, giving (as hath beene said) fond-foo∣lish counsell unto Pharao. Then rushed forth out of the barbarous Germanie. Lionesses den a Kennell of whelps in three Vessels, called in her language Cyulae, Ciulae. that is, Keeles, and in our Latine tongue, Longae naves, under full saile, carried with the wind of lucky sure presaging auguries, whereby fore-prophesied it was unto them, that for 300. yeares they should possesse and hold that land as their countrey, unto which they directed their course: and for an hundred and twentie, that is, the one moity of the said space, oftentimes waste and depopulate the same. These being put on shore, first in the East-part of the Island, and that by commandement of this infortunate tyrant, set fast their terrible pawes and clawes there, pretending unto the Islanders defence of their countrey, but more truely intending the offence thereof: unto which whelpes, the fore∣said dam, Germany. the Lionesse, finding that their first setting foote and marching forward sped well, sends likewise a greater rabble of worrying freebooters, which being arrived here in Flotes conjoyned themselves with the former misbegotten crew. From hence it is, that the shoot-grifts of iniquitie, the root of bitternesse, and virulent plants due to our deserts sprout and put forth in our soile, proudly bud, branch & leafe. Well, these barbarous Saxons thus ad∣mitted into the Island, obtaine allowance of victuals and wages, as for douty souldiers, and such as would endure hard service and much hazard (for so they falsly beare men in hand) in defence of their good hosts and friends for their kind entertainment. Which being gi∣ven unto them a long time stopped (as wee say) the dogs mouth. Howbeit afterward they complaine that their Epimenia. monthly wages was not well paid them, devising of purpose colourable occasions of quarrell, protesting and threatning, that unlesse they might feele more munifi∣cence powred and heaped upon them, they would with the breach of covenant spoile and waste the whole Island throughout. And without further delay they second these threats with very deeds, (for the cause of deserved revenge for precedent wickednesse, was still nourished) the fire kindled, and set a flaming by these prophane men from sea to sea, ceased not to con∣sume all the cities, and countreys bordering there about, untill such time as burning well neere all the inland soile of the Island it licked up with a red flaming, and terrible tongue all unto the westerne Ocean. In this violent furious invasion, comparable to that of the Assyri∣ans in old time against Iuda, is fulfilled also in us (according to the historie) that which the Prophet by way of sorrowfull lamentation uttereth: They have burnt with fire thy Sanctuarie, they have polluted in the Land the Tabernacle of thy name. And againe, O God, the Gentiles are come into thine heritage, they have defiled thy holy Temple, &c. In such wise, as all the Colonies by the force of many engines, and all the Inhabitants together with the Prelates of the Church, both Priests and People, by drawne sword glittering on every side, and crackling flame of fire, were at once laid along on the ground: yea, and that which was a piteous spectacle to behold, in the midst of the streets the stone workes of turrets, and high walles, rent and torne in sunder from aloft the sacred altars, and quarters of carcases (covered with imbossed works of imagerie) of a bloudy hue, were seene all blended and mixed together (as it were) in a cer∣taine horrible wine-presse, neither was there any Sepulcher at all abroad, save onely the ruins of buildings, and the bowels of wild beasts and fowles. When we shall read these reports, let vs not be offended and displeased with good Gildas, for his bitter invectives against either the vices of his owne countrey-men the Britans, or the inhumane outrages of the barbarous enemies, or the insatiable cruel∣tie of our Fore-fathers the Saxons. But since that for so many ages successively ensu∣ing, we are all now by a certaine engraffing or commixtion become one nation, mol∣lified and civilized with Religion, and good Arts, let us meditate and consider, both what they were, and also what wee ought to be: lest that for our sinnes likewise, the supreame Ruler of the world, either translate other nations hither, when wee are first rooted out, or incorporate them into us, after we are by them subdued. BRITANS OF ARMORICA. Gildas. D Vring this most wofull, desperate, and lamentable tempestuous season, some poore remaines of Britaines, being found in the mountaines, were killed up by whole heapes; others, pined with famine, came and yielded themselves unto the enemies, upon composition to serve them as Bondslaves for ever, so they might not bee killed out of hand, which was reputed a most high favour, and especiall grace. There were also that went over sea into strange lands▪ singing under their spread sailes with a howling and wailing note, in stead of the Mariners A song at their first set∣ting out. Celeusma, after this manner: Thou hast given us [O Lord] as sheepe to be devoured, and scattering us among the heathen. Others againe remained still in their owne countrey, albe∣it in fearefull estate, betaking themselves (but yet continually suspecting the worst) to high steepe hilles and mountaines intrenched, Bretagne, or little Britain. to woods, and thicke growne forrests, yea, to the rockes of the sea. Of those who passed beyond-sea, no doubt were they who for to save their lives, went over in great number to Or Welch∣men. Armorica in France, and were kindly received of the Armoricans. That this is true, besides the communitie of lan∣guage, (the same in manner with that of our Or Welch∣men. Britans) and to say nothing of other authors, who all accord in this point; hee who lived neerest unto that age, and was borne even in Armorica, and wrote the life of S. Wingual of the Confessor, suffici∣ently doth prove. An off-spring, saith he, of the Britans embarqued in Flotes, arrived in this land, on this side the British sea, what time as the barbarous nation of the Saxons fierce in armes, and uncivill in manners, possessed their native and mother-soile. Then, I say, this deare off-spring seated themselves close within this nooke and secret corner. In which place they being wearied with travaile and toile, sate quiet for awhile without any warres. How∣beit, our writers report, that our Britans long before this time, setled themselves in this coast. For, he of Malmesburie writeth thus: Constantinus Maximus being saluted by the Armie, Emperour, having proclaimed an Expedition into the higher lands, brought away a great power of British souldiers, through whose industrie and forward service, ha∣ving obtained triumphant victories to his hearts desire, and attained to the Empire: such of them as were past service, and had performed the painfull parts of souldjerie their full time, he planted in a certaine part of Gaule westward upon the very shore of the Ocean: where at this day their posteritie remaining, are wonderfully grown even to a mighty people, in manners and language somewhat degenerate from our Britans. And true it is that Con∣stantine gave commandement in this wise: Cod. Theod. lib. 7. Tit. 20. Let the old souldiers according to our Precept enter upon the vacant lands, and hold them for ever freely. Ninnius likewise: Maximus the Emperor who slew Gratian, would not send home again those souldiers which he had levied out of Britaine, but gave unto them many countries, even from the poole or Mere, which lieth above Mount Iovis unto the Citie that is called Cantguic, & unto Cruc-occhidi∣ent. And he that hath annexed briefe notes upon Ninnius, fableth besides in this man∣ner: The Armorican Britans which are beyond-sea, going forth from hence with Maxi∣mus the tyrant in his expedition, when as they could not returne, wasted the west-parts of Gaule, even to the very bare soile: and when they had married their wives and daughters, did cut out all their tongues, for feare lest the succeeding progenie should learne their mo∣ther-language: whereupon we also call them in our tongue, Lhet vydion, that is, halfe si∣lent or tongue-tied, because they speake confusedly. The authoritie of these writers here∣in I cannot in any wise contradict; yet I am of opinion rather, that the children of those old souldiers gladly afterward received these Britans that fled out of their coun∣trey. Neverthelesse, the name of Britans in this tract, I find not in all the writers of that age, before such time that the Saxons came into our Britain, unlesse it bee of those whom Plinie seemeth to place in Picardie, and who in some copies are named Brina∣ni. For if any man out of the fourth booke of Strabo his Geographie, doe with Vo∣laterane thinke, that Britaine was a citie of Gaule, let him but looke into the Greeke Booke, and he will soone informe himselfe, that he spake of the Island Britaine, and not of a citie. As for that verse out of Dionysius, which before I have alleaged, some would rather understand it with Stephanus of our Britans, than with Eustathius of the Armoricans, especially seeing that Festus Avienus, a writer verily of good anti∣quitie, hath translated it thus: Cauris nimium vicina Britaine. Britannis, Flava{que} caesariem Germania porrigit ora. Britaine the North-west winds too neare, And yellow haired Germanie her front doth forward beare. Neither let any man thinke that the Britannicians mentioned in the booke Notitia, Britanniciani. came from hence, who in truth were certaine cohorts onely of souldiers enrolled out of this our Britaine. Before the arrivall of our Britans, Armorica. this country was at first called, Armorica, that is, situate by the sea side: and afterwards in the same sense, Llydaw, in the British tongue, that is, coasting upon the sea, and thence in Latine by our writers living in the middle age, Haply, Lexo vij in Plinie. Zonaras. Procopius ter∣meth them Arborici: and another cal∣leth the coun∣trey, Corn Galliae. Letavia. From when I suppose, were those Leti whom Zosimus nameth in Gaule, when he noteth, that Magnentius the Tyrant, was borne among the Leti in France, and had a Britan to his father. These Armoricans when as that Constantine elected for the names sake became Emperor, and the barbarous nations over-ran Gaul, having cast out the Roman garrisons, instituted a common-wealth among them∣selves. But Valentian the younger by the meanes of Aetius, and at the intercession of Saint German, reclaimed them to allegiance. At which very time, it seemeth that Ex∣uperantius governed them. Of whom Claudius Rutillius writeth thus: Cujus Aremoricas Pater Exuperantius or as Nunc post liminium pacis amore docet. Leges restituit, libertatem{que} reducit, Et servos famulis non sinit essesuis. Whose Sire Exuperantius the coasts to sea that reach Now after discontinuance long in love of peace doth teach: He sets the lawes againe in force, reduceth libertie, And suffereth them unto his folke no more as slaves to be. Out of which verses, I wot not whether Aegidius Maserius hath made some collecti∣on, when he wrote, That the Britans were servants under the Armoricans and against them errected a freedome. The first mention to my knowledge of Britans in Armori∣ca, was in the yeare of our salvation 461. about the thirtith yeare after that the Anglo-Saxons were called out of Germany into our Britan. For then, Mansuetus a Bishop of the Britans, among other Bishops of France and Armorica, subscribed to the first Councell of Tours. In the ninth yeare after, these new Inhabitants of France, see∣ing the West-Gothes to seize into their hands the most fertile territories of Anjou and Poictou, Vis gothes. encountred them, and were a barre that the Gothes possessed not them∣selves of all France. For they sided with Anthemius the Roman Emperour against the Gothes, so far forth that Aruandus was condemned for treason, because in his let∣ters sent unto the King of the Gothes, Sid . Appolli∣nar. he had given counsell to set upon the Britans dwelling over the river Ligeris. Loire, and to divide France betweene the Gothes and Bur∣gundians. These Britans were a kind of people witty and subtile, warlike, tumultuous, and in regard of their valour, Anno 470. number, and association, stubborne: in which termes Sidonius Apollinaris complaineth of them unto Riothimus his friend, for so himselfe calleth him (but Jornandes nameth him King of the Britans) who afterward being sent for by Anthemius, came with a power of 12. thousand men to aid the Romans, but be∣fore that they joyned with them, being with his owne forces vanquished in open field by the Gothes, hee fled unto the Burgundians confederate with the Romans. From that time the native Armoricans being by little and little subdued, the name of the Britans in these parts, where they were newly seated, grew so great, that generally all the Inhabitants there, passed by little and little into the name of Britans: like as this whole tract was called Britannia Armorica, and of the French wri∣ ers. Frankners Britannia Cismarina, that is, Britan on this side the sea: and thereupon, I. Scaliger versified thus: Vicit Aremoricas animosa Britannia gentes, Et dedit imposito nomina prisca jugo. The nations Aremorican stout Britan overcame, And with the yoke of servitude gave them her ancient name. For, they turned the edge of their weapons upon those their friends that gave them entertainement, Venett sis. as appeareth evidently both by other testimonies, and also by these words of Regalis Bishop of Vennes as touching himself and his: We living, saith he, in captivitie under the Britans are subject to a grievous and heavie yoke. Moreover, in the times succeeding, Gregor. Tur . lib. 10. cap. 9. they couragiously maintained themselves and their estates: First un∣der petty Kings, afterwards under Counts and Dukes against the French; albeit as Glaber Rodolphus writeth; Their only wealth was immunitie from paiments to the pub∣lique Treasurie, and plentie of milke: Also 500. yeares since, William of Malmesbury wrote thus of them: A kind of people they are needy and poore in their owne country; otherwise also with foraine mony waged, and purchasing a laborious and painfull life. If they be well paid, they refuse not so much as to serve in civill war one against another without all regard of right or kindred, but according to the quantitie of mony readie with their service for what part soever you would have them. BRITANS OF VVALES AND CORNWALES. T He rest of the Britans, who pitifully distressed in their own native coun∣trey were put to seeke for their countrey, were overlaied with so great calamities, as no man is able sufficiently to expresse acccording to the nature of such horrible particulars; as being not only molested grievous∣ly by the Saxons, Picts, & Scots, who made cruel war upon them far & neere, but also oppressed under the proud and intollerable rule of wicked tyrants, in all places. Now who those tyrants were and of what quality about the yeare of our Lord 500. have here in few words out of Gildas, who then lived and was an eie witnesse. Constan∣tine a Tyrant among the Amphibal∣lus a sacred vesture hairie on both sides. An old Glos∣sarie. Aurelius Conanus, whe also was cal∣led Caninus. V.c. in an old booke. Vortipor. Danmonij, albeit he had sworne in expresse words before God and the companie of holy Saints, that he would performe the office of a good Prince, yet in two Churches under the sacred vesture of an Abbat, flew two children of the bloud royall, together with their Fosters, two right valiant men: and many yeares before having put away his lawfull wife, was foulie defiled with a number of foule filthie adulteries. Aurelius Conanus, wallowing in the mire of Parricidies and adulteries, hating the peace of his countrie, is left alone as a tree withering in the open field: whose father and brethren were with a wild, youthfull, and overweening phantasie carried away, and by untimely death, surprized. Vortiporius tyrant of the Southwales, as Caermar∣den shire, Pembrooke shire, and Cardi∣gan shire. Cuneglasus. Dimetae, the ungratious sonne of a good father, like to a Panther in manners, so variably spotted with vices of divers sorts: when his head was now waxen hoary and gray, sitting in his throne full of craft and guile, and the same defiled with Parici∣dies, or murthers of his owne kinred, and with adulteries beside, cast off his owne wife, (and filthily abused her daughter unawares, and unwitting) yea, and he tooke also her life away. Cuneglasus, in the Roman tongue, Lanio fulvus, that is, the Lyon tawney Butcher, a Beare sitting and riding upon many, the driver of that chariot which holdeth the Beare, a contemner of God, an oppressor of the Clergie, fighting against God with grievous sinnes, and warring upon man with materiall armour, and weapons, turned away his wife, provoked the Saints and holy men with manifold injuries, proudly conceited of his owne wisedome, and set∣ting his hope in the uncertaintie of riches. Maglocunus, Magoeunus. Dragon of the Isles, the deposer of many Tyrants out of Kingdome and life both, the most forward in all mischiefe: for power and malicious wickednesse together, grea∣ter then many more: a large giver, but a more prodigall, and profuse sinner: stronger in armes, higher also than all the Potentates of Britaine, as well in royall dominion, as in the stature and lineaments of his person. In his youthfull daies with sword and fire, he brought to destruction his Vncle by the mothers side, (being then King) together with many right hardy and redoubted servitours. After that phantasie of a violent course of rule according to his desire was gone, upon a remorse of conscience for his sinnes, vowed to bee a professed Monke: but soone after returning to his vomit, breaking the said vow of Monkes profession, he despised his first marriage, and became enamoured upon the wife of his brothers sonne, whiles he was living; the said brothers sonne, and his owne wife, (after hee had kept her for a certaine time) hee murthered, and then maried that brothers sonnes wife, whom hee before had loved. But I must leave the report of these things to History writers, who hitherto have falsly set downe, that these Tyrants succeeded one after another: where∣as in truth as we may perceive by Gildas, who speaketh unto them severally, and per∣sonally one by one, they all at once, and the very same time usurped tyranny in divers quarters of the Island. And now to returne: The residue of Britans remaining alive, withdrew them∣selves into the westerne parts of the Island, naturally fenced with mountaines, and in∣lets of the sea, Cornwalis. Britwales. Welch. Walli. to those parts (I meane) which now we call Wales, and Cornwall. The Inhabitants of the one the Saxons named , of the other , like as those in Gaule, Galweales ; For Walsh with them signifieth strange and forraine: whence also the Wallons in the low Countries, and the Vallachians upon the river Danubium. Dunow had their names. The Britwales, Welchmen. or Welshmen, a very warlike nation, for many yeares defended their libertie under pettie-kings: and albeit they were secluded from the English-Sax∣ons by a Ditch or Trench which King Offa cast, (a wonderfull piece of worke) yet otherwhiles by fire and sword they spoiled their cities, and in like sort suffered at their hands all extremities of hostilitie whatsoever. At the length in the raigne of Edward the First, Statute of Wales. as he writeth of himselfe, The Divine providence which in the owne dispose is never deceived, among other good gifts dispenced by it, and with which it hath vouchsa∣fed our Kingdome of England to bee adorned, hath converted now full, wholly, and entirely (of her good grace) the Land of Wales with the Inhabitants thereof (subject before time un∣to to us by fealtie and service) into our proper dominion, and without any let or barre whatso∣ever, hath annexed and united it unto the Crowne of the foresaid Realme, as a part of one and the same bodie politicke. Howbeit in the age next ensuing, they could no way bee induced to undergoe the yoke of subjection, neither could the quarrels by any means possibly be taken up, nor the most deadly hatred betweene the two nations extingui∣shed, untill that King Henry the seventh, who descended of them, assisted the oppres∣sed Welchmen. Britans with his gracious hand, and King Henry the Eighth, admitted them unto the same condition of Lawes and Liberties, that the English enjoy. Since which time, yea and very often also before, the Kings of England have had triall of their constant fidelitie, and loyall allegiance. As for those Cornwallians, although they stoutly bent all their force together in defence of their Country, yet soone became they subject to the Saxons, as who neither matched them in number, neither was their Countrey sufficiently fenced by nature to defend them. Let this suffice that hath beene said, touching the Britans and Romans: but since we treat of the Inhabitants, we may not in this place omit, (although wee have here∣tofore spoken thereof already) that which Lib. 1. Zosimus reporteth; How that Probus the Emperour, sent over into Britaine the Vandals and Burgundians, whom he had o∣vercome, who having seated themselves here, stood the Romans in good stead, as oft as any one raised tumult and sedition. But where they were planted, I know not, un∣lesse it were in Cambridge-shire. For, Gervase of Tilbury maketh mention of an ancient rampier or hold in that shire, which he calleth Vandelsbury, and saith, it was the worke of the Vandals. Neither let any man surmize, that in the daies of Constantius the Poeni had their abode here, grounding upon these words of Eumenius the Rhetorician: [ Except per∣haps no greater ruine had fallen upon Britaine, and borne it downe, than if it had beene dren∣ched throughout, and overwhelmed with the over-flowing of the Ocean: which being deli∣vered from the most deepe gulfe [Poenorum] began to appeare and shew it selfe at the view and sight of the Romans.] For, in the old Copie belonging sometime to Humfrey Duke of Glocester, and afterwards to the right honourable Baron Burghly, Lord high Treasurer of England, we reade [ Poenarum gurgitibus ] that is, The gulfes of punishments, and not Poenorum gurgitib. For he seemeth to speake of the calamities and miseries wherewith Britaine was afflicted under Carausius. Whereas Agathias in the second booke of his Histories, hath these words, Hunnica natio Britones sunt, that is, The Britons are a nation of the Hunnes: I would have no man hereby raise a slander upon the Britans, or thinke them to bee issued from the savage cruell Hunnes. For, long since Francis Pithaeus a very learned man, hath averred unto mee, and now of late I. Lewenclaius, a right worthy Historian, published in writing, that in a Greeke Copie it is read, , and not Britones. PICTS. N Ow let us come to the other Inhabitants of Britaine, and first unto the Picts, PICTS. whom for Antiquitie next unto Britains, the Historiographers have accounted the second. Hector Boetius deriveth these from the Agathyrsti: Pomponius Laetus, Aventinus and others from the Ger∣mans: some from the Pictones in France, and Beda from the Scythians. It hapned, saith hee, that the nations of the Picts came in long Gallies or Keeles. ships, and those not many, out of Scythia, (as the report goeth) into Ireland: and of the Scots whom they found there, requested (but in vaine) a place of habitation: by whose perswasion they went into Britaine, and inhabited the Northerne parts thereof, and that was a∣bout the yeare of our Redemption, (as many would have it) 78. I for my part, in so great a varietie of opinions, know not which I should follow: yet, (that I may speake what I suppose to be true, and deliver mine owne judgement) were it not that in this point the authoritie of venerable Beda, did over-weigh all the conjectures of all others, I would thinke that the Picts came from no other place at all, but were very naturall Britaines themselves, even the right progenie of the most ancient Britaines: those Britans, I meane, and none other, who before the comming in of the Romans, were seated in the North part of the Island, and of those who afterwards, casting off the yoke of bondage (as they are a nation most impatient of servilitie) repaired unto these in the North. Like as when the Saxons over-ran the Isle, those Britaines which would not forgoe their libertie, conveied themselves into the Westerne parts of the Island, full of craggie hils, as Wales and Cornwall: even so, doubtlesse, when the Roman warre grew hot, the Britaines lest they should undergoe servitude, (which is of all the miseries the extreamest) gat them into these Northerne parts, frozen with the bitter cold of the aire full of rough and rugged passages, and full of washes and standing meeres. Where being armed not so much with weapons, as with a sharpe aire and climate of their owne, they grew up together with the native Inha∣bitants whom there they found, unto a mightie and populous nation. For, Tacitus reporteth, that the enemies of the Romans were by his wives father Agricola, driven into this part, as it were, into another Island: and no man doubteth, but Britans they where which inhabited these remotest parts of the Island. For, shall we dreame that all those Britans, enemies to the Romans, which brought out thirtie thousand armed men into the field against Agricola, who gave unto Severus so great overthrowes, that of Romans and Associats he lost in one expedition and journey 70000. were kil∣led up every mothers sonne, and none left for seed, and procreation, that they might give roome unto forrainers out of Scythia and Thracia? So farre am I from belee∣ving this, although Beda hath written so much by relation from others, that I would rather affirme, they were so multiplied, that the very soile was not able either to re∣lieve or receive them, and were enforced therefore to over-flow, and over-whelme, as it were, the Roman Province, which came to passe wee know afterwards, when the Scots came in unto them. But because Beda hath so written, as others in that time reported, may easily bee brought to believe, that some also out of Scandia, called in times past Scythia, (as all the Northerne tract beside) came by the Isles, that by a continued ranke lie betweene, unto those Northerne Britaines. Yet lest any man should imagine, Their man∣ners and de∣meanour. that I seeke to countenance a lie, carrying likelihood and probabili∣tie of a truth, me thinkes I am able to prove, that the Picts were very Britans indeed, by the demeanor, name, and language of the Picts, wherein wee shall see they agreed passing well with Britaines. And to let passe among other reasons, that neither the Picts, according to Beda, nor the Britans, as Tacitus writeth, made by any distinction of sex for government in chiefe, or excluded women from bearing scepter, that custome of painting, and stai∣ning themselves with colours, was common to both nations. As touching the Bri∣tans, wee have prooved it before: and for the Picts, Claudian proveth it for us, who writeth thus: —Nec falso nomine Pictos Edomuit.— The Picts hee tam'd So truely nam'd. And in another place, —Ferro{que} notatas Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figuras: —And doth peruse with eie Those iron-brent marks in Picts well seene all bloudlesse, as they die. Which Isidore doth shew more plainly: Their name. The Nation of the Picts (saith he) have a name drawne even from their bodies, for that by the artificiall pricking therein of small holes with a needle, the workman wringing out the juce of greene grasse, encloseth the same within, that their Nobilitie and Gentry thus spotted, may carry these skarres about them, in their painted pounced limbes, as badges to be knowne by. Shall we thinke now, that these Picts were Germans, who never used this manner of painting? or the Agathyrsi of Thracia, so farre distant from hence; or rather the very Britans themselves? seeing they were in the selfe same Isle, and retained the same guise, and fashion of painting. Neither are those barbarous people, who so long time made such incursions out of the Forrest Caledonia, and from that farthest Northerne coast found the Romans worke, otherwise called than Britans, of the ancient writers, Dio, Herodian, Vopiscus, and others. Semblably, Tacitus who describeth at large the warres of Agricola, his wives Father, in this utmost coast of Britaine, calleth the Inhabitants by no other name than Britans, and Britans of Now Alba∣nie. Caledonia: whereas notwithstanding, our later Writers have recorded, that the Picts, new comers hither, were arrived there tenne yeares before; a thing that I would have you to note, considering that Tacitus in that age knew not of them at all. Neither would those Roman Emperors, who war∣red fortunatly against them, to wit, Commodus, Severus, with Bassianus and Geta his sonnes, have assumed into their Stile that addition of BRITANNICVS, after they had vanquished them, unlesse they had beene Britans. Certes, if the Romans, for whose magnificence every thing made that was strange, had subdued any other nati∣on there beside the Britans, and the same before time unknowne, (were they called Picts or Scots) they would (no doubt) have been knowne by the titles of PICTICVS and SCOTICVS in their coines and inscriptions. Tacitus guesseth by their deep yellow bush of haire, and their large limbes, that they had their beginning out of Germa∣nie: but straightwaies after, and more truely he attributeth all to the climate, and positure of the heaven, which yieldeth unto bodies their complection and feature. Whereupon, Vitruvius also writeth thus: Vnder the North Pole are nations bred and fostered, bigge and tall of bodie, of colour browne, with haire of head even, and streight, and the same ruddie. In like manner, that the Caledones, (without all question Britans) were the selfe same nation of the Picts, the Panegyrick Author after a sort doth inti∣mate, writing thus: The woods of the Caledones, and of other Picts, &c. as if the Cale∣dones also, had beene none other but the Picts. And that those Caledonians were Bri∣tans borne. Martiall in this verse of his, implieth: Quinte Caledonios Ovidi visure Britnnos: Quint Ovide, Britans Caledon, thou that dost mind to see. Ausonius likewise, who sheweth withall that they were painted, while hee com∣pareth their colour unto green mosse, distinguished with gravell between, in this wise: —Viridem distinguit glarea muscum; Tota Caledonijs talis pictura Britannis: —Like to greene mosse with gravell rewes between, The Britans Caledonian are all be painted seen. But, as these for a long time were no otherwise known than by the name of Britans, and that, by reason of their depainted bodies: so afterwards, about the time of Maxi∣mian and Dioclesian, (neither before that, find wee the name of Picts in any writers) when Britaine had so long beene a Province, that the Inhabitants had learned the pro∣vinciall Latine tongue, then (it seemeth) began they to bee called Picts, for distin∣ction sake, that they might be known from them that were confederate with the Ro∣manes, and called Britans. And whence should they bee called Picts, if it were not because they depainted themselves? Now if any one there be, who beleeveth not, that our Britans used the prouincial Latin tongue, little knoweth he certainly how earnest∣ly the Romans laboured, that the Provinces might speake Latin, neither seeth he what a number of Latine words is crept into the British language: that I may not urge the authoritie of Tacitus, who saith, that in the Domitians time the Britans affected very much the eloquence of the Latine tongue. And as touching the name of Picts, the authoritie of Flavius Vegetius may soone cleare this doubt, who sheweth (after a sort) that the Britans used the word [ Pict ] in the very same sense, for a thing that is coloured, Lib. 4. cap. 37. as the Latines doe. For, he writeth, that the Britans called these light Pin∣naces of espiall, PICTAS; the sailes, gables, and other tacklings whereof were died with a blew or watchet colour, like as the mariners, and souldiers to them belong∣ing, who were clad in blew apparell. Surely if the Britans called Ships, for their sailes and tacklings stained with the said blew colour, PICTAS, what letteth but that they should call the people PICTI, who were painted with sundry colours, and with blew especially, for that is the colour that woad giveth? This also maketh for us, that the Northerne Picts, whom Saint Columbane by preaching the word, and by his good example brought unto Christianitie, as in the ancient English Annals, named, , as one would say, Britan Picts. The cause whereof we draw not many proofes from the language, is this, for that of the Picts tongue, Their Lan∣guage. there can scarce one word be gathered out of Authors: yet it see∣meth to be the same that the British. Beda wrote, that the Roman wall made against the incursions of the Picts, beganne in a place, which in the Picts Language is called, Penuahel: and Pengwall, among the Britans expresly signifieth, The beginning or head of the wall. Moreover, throughout all that tract of the Island, which the Picts held longest (and that was the East part of Scotland) the names of most places doe savour of a British originall: as for example, Morria, Marnia, for that they be countries ad∣joyning to the sea, comming of the British word Mor, that is, Sea. Aberden, Aberloth∣net, Aberdore, Aberneith, that is, the mouth of Den, of Lothnet, of Dore and Neith, from the British word, Aber, which signifieth the mouth of a river. Strathbolgi, Strath∣dee, Strathearn, that is, The Dale or Vale of Bolgi, Dee, and Earne, comming of Strath, which in the British tongue betokeneth, a Valley. Yea, and the chiefe seat of the Picts, doth acknowledge no other original than a British, I meane Edenburgh, which Ptolomy calleth Castrum alatum, that is, the winged Castle. For Aden, in British is, a Wing. Nei∣ther will I (by way of proofe) take hold of this argument, that some of the British pettie Kings, were called Baidij, which is as much in the Britan language (as I have often said) as Depainted. Out of these premises verily, we may without any absur∣ditie conclude, That the Picts Language, and the British differed not, and therefore the nations were not divers; howsoever Beda speaketh of the Picts and Britans tongues, as if they were distinct one from the other; in which place, hee may bee thought to have meant their sundrie Dialects. Neither is there cause why any man should marvell, that the Picts wrought so much mischiefe, and gave so many overthrowes unto their country-men the Britans, considering that wee see at this day in Ireland, those which are within the English pale, have none so deadly foes unto them, as their owne countrey-men, the wilde I∣rish. For like; as we read in Paulus Diaconus, the Gothes, Hypogothes, Gepidians, and Vandals, varying their names onely, and speaking one and the selfe-same lan∣guage, encountered often times one another in open field with Banner displayed; even so did the Picts and Britans, especially when these Britans were become the Roman allies. These were the reasons, such as they be, that tooke hold of mee, and induced mee in a manner, to thinke the Picts a remnant of the Britans: but perhaps the autho∣ritie of Beda weigheth downe all this; and therefore, if ye thinke so good, let the tra∣dition of so reverend a man, grounded upon the relation of others, prevaile and take place before these conjectures. These Picts Ammianus Marcellinus divideth into Dicalidonians, and Vecturiones. I would rather read Deucalidonians, and doe thinke they were planted about the We∣sterne coasts of Scotland, where the Deucalidonian Sea breaketh in. And albeit I have beeene of opinion, that these were so called, as if a man would say, Blacke Caledo∣nians, Dical dinij. Vecturiones. for Dee in the British tongue, signifieth Blacke ) like as the Irish now adaies terme the Scots of that tract, Duf Allibawn, that is, Blacke Scots, and so the Britans cal∣led the rovers and pirats, which out of these parts did much scath at sea, Yllu du, that is, the blacke armie: yet now, mee thinkes we may guesse, (for guesses are free) that they tooke that name from their scituation. For Debeu Caledonij, betokeneth the Ca∣ledonians dwelling on the right hand, that is, Westward; like as the other Picts, who kept on the left hand, that is, Eastward, which Ninnius calleth, the left side, were named Vecturiones, by a word haply drawne from Chwithic, which in the British tongue, signifieth, Left ; and these some thinke are corruptly called in Ptolome , Ver∣nicones. And an old Saxon fragment seemeth to give them the name of , for so they terme an enemie-nation to the Britans: whereas the ancient Angles, or English called the Picts themselves, Pehits and Peohtas. And hereupon it is that wee read eve∣rie where in Whitkindus, Pehiti, for Picti. The manners of the Picts. The manners of these ancient and barbarous Britans, who afterwards came to bee named Picts, I have heretofore described out of Dio, and Herodian. It remaineth now, that I goe on with my webbe, and weave thus much to it: namely, that in the declining state of the Empire, when the Romans somewhat unadvisedly, and with∣out good forecast enrolled cohorts of the Barbarians, Blondus. certaine of these Picts, (when all was in quietnesse and peace) were taken into the militarie service of the Romans by Honorius, Honoriaci. and therefore termed Honoriaci, who under that Tyrant Constantine (e∣lected in hope of so fortunate a name) having set open the fortified entries of the Py∣raenean hils, let Barbarians into Spaine. In the end, when first by themselves, and af∣terwards combining with the Scots their confederats, they had afflicted the Roman Province, they began, though late it were, to waxe civill. Those of the South, were by Ninias, or Ninianus the Britan, a most holy man, converted to Christ, in the yeare of Grace foure hundred and thirtie. But they of the North, who were seclu∣ded from the Southerne by a continuall ridge of high craggie mountaines, Bede. by Co∣lumbanus a Scot of Ireland, a Monke likewise of passing great holinesse, in the yeare 565. who taught them, whence soever hee learned it, to celebrate the feast of Easter, Reckoning the said day. betweeee the fourteenth day of the Moone in March, unto the twentieth, but alwaies upon the Lords day, as also to use another manner of tonsure, or shaving their heads, than the Romans did, to wit, representing the imperfect forme of a Coronet. About these ceremonies hard hold there was, and eager disputation for a long time in this Island, untill that Naitanus a King of the Picts brought his owne subjects with much adoe unto the Roman observance. In which age very many Picts with great devotion, as the daies were then, frequented the Chappels and Shrines of Saints at Rome, and among others he that is mentioned in the Antiquities of Saint Peters Church there, Asterius Co∣mes. Pictorum. in these words [ASTERIVS COMES PICTORVM ET SYRA CVM SVIS VOTVM SOLVERE] that is, Asterius a Count or Earle of the Picts, and Syra with their family performed their vowes. At length, by the Scots that infested them out of Ireland, they were made to stoop, and after so daunted, as that about the yeare of our Lord 740. being vanquished in a most bloudy battell, they were either utterly extinct, or else by little and little, quite passed into their Scottish name, and nation. Which very same thing chanced to the most puissant Nation of the Gaules, who be∣ing subdued of the Frankes by little and little, were turned into their name, and called with them, Franci, that is, French. Whereas the Panegyrick author, giveth some inkling, that Britaine before Cae∣sars time used to skirmish with their enemies the Picts and Irish, halfe naked men, hee seemeth to speake after the manner of the time wherein hee lived: but surely in those daies, there were none knowne in Britaine by the name of Picts. Also, whereas Sidonius Apollinaris in his Panegyrick to his wives Father poeti∣cally powred out these verses: —Victricia Caesar Signa Caledonios transvexit ad us{que} Britannos, Fuderit & quanquam Scotum & cum Saxone Pictum: In traine of Conquest Caesar still his ensignes even as farre As Britaine Caledonian advanc'd: and though no barre Staid him, but that the Scots and Picts, with Saxons he subdu'd, &c. I cannot chuse but with another Poet, crie out in this wise: —Sit nulla fides augentibus omnia Musis: These Poets love to over-reach, Beleeve them not, when so they teach. For, Caesar who is prodigall in his owne praise, would never have concealed these exploits, if he had ever performed them. But these men seeme not unlike to those good, honest, and learned writers in our age, who whiles they patch together an hi∣storie of Caesar, write forsooth, how he subdued the Franks in Gaule, and the Eng∣lish men in Britaine, whereas in those daies the names of English, and French were not so much as heard of, either in the one or the other country, as who, many ages after, came into these Regions. That the Pictones of Gaule, Pictones. and our Picts were both one Nation, I dare not with Ioannes Picardus avouch, seeing the names of the Pictones in Gaule was even in Cae∣sars time very ri e and much spoken of, and for that our Picts were never called Pi∣ctones: yet am I not ignorant, how in one onely place of the Panegyrist among all the rest, through the negligence of the copier, there was foisted in Pictonum, in stead of Pictorum. SCOTI. A Mong the people of Britaine, after Picts, the SCOTISH Nation by good right challenge the next place: concerning whom, before I speake ought, for feare lest evill willers, & frowardly peevish, should calumniously mis∣consture those allegations, which I, simply, ingenuously, and in all honest meaning, shall heere cite out of ancient writers as touching Scots, I must certifie the Reader before hand, that every particular hath reference to the old, true, and naturall Scots onely: Whose of-spring are those Scots speaking Irish, which inhabite all the West part of the Kingdome of Scotland, now so called and the Islands adjoyning thereto, and who now adaies be termed High-land men. For, the rest which are of civill behaviour, and bee seated in the East part thereof, albeit they beare now the name of Scottish-men, yet are they nothing lesse than Scots, but descended from the same Germane originall, that wee English men are. And this, neither can they chuse but confesse, nor we but acknowledge, being as they are, teamed by those above said, High-land men. Sassones, as well as we; and using as they doe the same language with us, to wit, the English-Saxon, different onely in Dialect, a most assured ar∣gument of one and the same originall. In which regard, so farre am I from working any discredit unto them, that I have rather respectively loved them alwaies, as of the same bloud and stocke, yea, and honoured them too, even when the Kingdomes were divided: but now much more, since it hath pleased our Almightie, and most mercifull God, that we grow united in one bodie, under one most Sacred head of the Empire, to the joy, happinesse, welfare, and safetie, of both Nations, which I heartily wish and pray for. The beginning and Etymologie of the Scotish Nation, like as of other neighbour nations round about, is so full of obscuritie, and lies over-spred under the mist of darkenesse, in such sort, that even Buchanan himselfe, though otherwise a man of a very deepe insight, either hath seene little therein, or seene to himselfe alone: for in this point he hath come short of all mens expectation. Whereupon I have forborne a long time to take this enterprize in hand, lest with others in admiring fables, I should full sweetly please my selfe, and fall into folly. For, a man may with as great probability derive the Scots pedigree from the Gods, as from Scota that supposed and counterfeit daughter of the Aegyptian King Pharaoh, Scota, King Pharaohs daughter. wedded (forsooth) unto Gaithe∣lus, the sonne of Cecrops founder of Athens. But, as this conceite arising from the unskilfulnesse of Antiquitie, is of the better sort of ingenuous Scots rejected: so, that other opinion of later daies, drawne without all sense from a Greeke fountaine, that Scots should bee so called, as it were, , that is, Obscure, I utterly disallow and condemne, as a device of envious persons, to the slanderous reproach of a famous and valiant Nation. Neither doe all men like the derivation of our Flower ga∣therer, the name of an Historie. Lib. 9. cap. 2. Florilegus, namely, that Scots were so called, because they came of a confused mingle-mangle of divers nations: And yet I cannot but marvell, whence Isidorus had this: The Scots (saith he) take their name in their owne proper tongue of their painted bodies, for that they are mar∣ked with sharpe yron pricks, and inke, and so receive the print of sundry shapes. Which also Rabanus Maurus, in the very same words (doubtlesse out of him) doth testifie in his Geographie to Ludovicus ius the Emperour, which is to be seene in the Libra∣rie of Trinitie Colledge in Oxford. But seeing that Scotland it selfe hath of her owne people such as might very well fetch their beginning from the inmost record of Antiquitie, and thereby best of all advance the glory of their Country, in case they would wholly set their minds, and bestow their carefull diligence for a time in this argument; I will point only with my finger to the fountaines, from whence haply they may draw the truth; and lay before them certaine observations, which I would wish them to marke, and consider more diligently: for, my selfe will in this matter play the Scepticke, and affirme nothing. And first, touching their originall; and then, of the place from whence they remo∣ved, and came over into Ireland. For, certainely knowne it is, that out of Ireland, an Isle inhabited in old time by Britans, Ireland the native Coun∣trey of the Scots. as shall in due place be proved, they passed into Britan, and what time as they were first known unto writers by this name, seated they were in Ireland. For, Claudian the Poet hath written of their irruptions into Britaine, in these verses: —Totam cum Scotus Hibernem Movit, & infesto spumavit remige Thetis: What time the Scots all Ireland stir'd offensive armes to take, And with maine stroke of enemies ores, the sea much fome did make. And also in another place; Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Hiberne: And frozen Ireland, heapes of Scots bewail'd with many a teare. Orosius likewise writeth thus; Ireland is peopled with Scotish Nations. Gildas cal∣leth Scots, Irish Spoilers. And Beda; The Scots that inhabite Ireland, an Isle next unto Britaine: as also elsewhere. Yea, and in the daies of Charles the Great, Eginhardus in expresse words, calleth Ireland, The Isle of Scots. Moreover, Giraldus Cambrensis; That the Scottish nation (saith he) is descended out of Ireland, the affinitie as well of their Language, as of their apparell, of their weapons also, and of their manners even to this day doe sufficiently prove. But now to come unto the points which I would have the Scots throughly to weigh. For as much as they which are right and naturall Scots, acknowledge not this name of Scots, Gaiothel, or Gaithel, and G el. but otherwise call themselves Gaoithel, Gael, and Albin ; seeing also, that very many people have other names given unto them by their neighbours, than they use themselves, whereby often times there is a secret light given unto nations of their descent: as for example; the Inhabitants of the lower Pannonia, who terme them∣selves Magier, are in Dutch named Hungari, for that they came first of the Huns: they that border upon the Forrest Hercynia, among themselves are called Czechi, but by o∣thers Bohemi, because they descended from the Burbonnois. Boij in Gaule: the Inhabitants of A∣fricke, who having also a peculiar name among themselves, are by the Spaniards ter∣med Alarbes, for that they be Arabians: the Irish, who call themselves Erinach, are by our Welchmen. Britans named Gwidhil: considering also, that as well those Irish, and these our Welchmen. Britans, gave no other name to us English men, then Sassons, because were are descended from the Saxons; I would have the learned Scotish men first to consider, whether they might not bee called of their neighbours, as one would say, Scythae. For, even as the Flemings and other Netherlanders, expresse by this one word, Scut∣ten, both the Scythians and Scots; so it hath beene observed out of our British writers, that they named both Scythians and Scots, Y-Scot. Ninnius also expresly calleth the Britans that inhabite Ireland, Scythians: and the narrow sea, through which they pas∣sed over out of Ireland into Britaine, allis Scythica. Gildas nameth, Vallem Scythicam, that is, The Scythian Vale. For so hath the copie printed at Paris, where others without all sense read, Stythicam Vallem ▪ Moreover, King Alfred, who seven hundred yeares past transla∣ted the Historie of Orosius into the English-Saxon tongue, turned [ Scotos ] into [ Scyttan ] and our Country-men, who dwell next to Scotland, use to call them, not by the name of Scots, In Hypodig∣mate. but Scyttes, and Scettes. For, like as ( Walsingham is mine au∣thor) the same people be called Getae, Getici, Gothi, Gothici ; so, from one and the same originall, Scythae, Scitici, Scoti, Scoeici, take their names. But whether this name were imposed upon this nation by their neighbours, in re∣gard of Scythian manners, or because they came out of Scythia, let them here advise well upon it. Surely, both Lib. 6. Diodorus Siculus, and also Lib. 4. Strabo, compare the first Britans inhabiting Ireland, (which is the native country indeed of the wild Irish, and those that be right Scots) with the Scythians for their savage nature. Besides, they drinke bloud out of the wounds of men slaine: they establish leagues among them∣selves, by drinking one anothers bloud; and suppose, that the greater number of slaughters they commit, the more honour they win: and so did the Scythians in old time. To this wee may adde, that these [wild] Scots, like as the Scythians, had for their principall weapons, bowes and arrowes. For, Orpheus termeth Scythians , even as Aelianus, and Julius Pollux, Sagittarios, that is, Archers. And learned men there be, that thinke hereupon both nations had this name given unto them, for their skill in shooting. Neither may this seeme strange, that divers nations carried the same names, by occasion of the same manners: as they who have travailed all o∣ver the West-Indies, doe write, that all strange, and hardie men that doe so much mischiefe with bow and arrowes throughout all India, Caribes. Benzo. lib. 2. and the Isles thereof; are by one name called Caribes, although they be of divers nations. Now, that these Scots came out of Scythia, the Irish Historiographers them∣selves doe report: For Nemethus the Scythian, and long after him, Delas, one of Nemethus his progenie, that is, of the Scythian stocke, they reckoned among the first Inhabitants of Ireland. Ninnius likewise a Disciple of Eluodugus, hath plainly writ∣ten thus: In the fourth age of the world (that space I meane which was betweene the building of Salomons Temple, and the captivitie of Babylon) the Scythians possessed themselves of Ireland. And hereto accordeth the authoritie of later writers, to wit, of Cisnerus in his preface to Crantzius ; Tom. 1. pag. 37. and of Reinerus Reineccius, who writeth thus: There remaineth yet the nation of the Scots in Britaine, sprung from the Scythians, &c. And yet I verily doubt, although the Getae were a Scythicke nation, whether the Poet Pro∣pertius meaneth those Irish of ours, in writing thus: Hiberni{que} Getae, Picto{que} Britannia curru. Both Irish Getes and Britaine with her painted chariot. But the Scots should lose part of their honour and dignitie, Whence the Scots came into Ireland. unlesse they be brought out of Spaine into Ireland. For, both they themselves, and their Historiographers labour to prove with all their might and maine; and good reason, (I assure you) have they so to doe. Scythians in Spaine. Unlesse therefore wee find Scythians in Spaine, all our la∣bour is lost. And that Scythians have beene in Spaine (to say nothing of a promonto∣rie or point among the Cantabri, called Scythicum next unto Ireland, and how that Strabo writeth, that the Those of Biscay, and there about. Concani. Cantabri and Scythians sorted well together in their de∣portment) Silius Italicus a Spaniard borne, doth most plainely declare: for by these verses he sheweth, that the Concani, a nation of Cantabria, were begotten of the Mas∣sagetae, that is, Scythians. Et quae Massagetem monstrans feritate parentem, Lib. 3. Cornipedis fusâ satiaris Concane venâ. And ye your Parents Massagets in fiercenesse that doe show, Hight Concani, drinke horses blood, as it from veine doth flow. And after some few verses betweene, hee proveth, that the Russians, and Tartari∣ans. Sarmotae, whom all men confesse to have beene Scythians, built the Citie Susana in Spaine, whiles hee singeth in this note: Capanillo. Sarmaticos attollens Susana muros: Susana, with high Sarmatian wals. Luceni. Of these Sarmatians or Scythians, the Luceni, whom Orosius placeth in Ireland, seem to be descended (considering that the Spaniards themseves put Susana among the Those about Luca. Lucensians of Spaine) like as of those Concani, the Gangani of Ireland. For the Lucensij and Concani in Cantabria, were neighbour nations, even as the Luceni and Gangani in that coast of Ireland opposite to Spaine. Now if any man demand of me, what those Scythians were which came into Spaine. Verily I know not, unlesse a man would thinke them to have beene Germans: Germans in Spaine. And I could wish that the Scots themselves would enter into a more serious and deepe consideration of this point. But, that the Germans long agoe entred into Spaine; beside Plinie, who calleth the Oretani in Spaine, Germans, Seneca which was a Spaniard borne will enforme us. The mountaine Pyrenaeus (saith he) stopped not the passage of the Germans; De consolatione ed Albinum lib. 4. cap. 12. the levitie of men made shift to enter through places scant passable, and unknowne. And that the Ger∣mans were called Scythians, we gather not onely out of Ephorus and Strabo, who termed all the nations in the North, Scythians, but also out of Plinie. The name of Scythians (quoth he) extendeth it selfe farre and wide every way, even to the Samaritans and Germans. Aventinus also witnesseth, that Germans were by the Hungarians called Scythae and Scythulae. And to derive descent from a Scythian stock, cannot be thought any waies dishonourable, seeing that the Scythians, as they are most ancient, so they have been the Conquerours of most Nations, themselves alwaies invincible, and ne∣ver subject to the Empire of others. Neither must we forget in this place that the Cauci and Menapij, ranged among the most famous Nations of Germanie, are by Ptolomee placed in Ireland under the same names, and in the very same vicinitie one to the other: so that by all likelihood, they derived from the same Germans, both their name, and also their descent. If the Scots have not their originall from these, I would they pondred with them∣selves, whether they were not of those Barbarians, who (as it is recorded in King Al∣phonsus his Chronicles) were by Constantine the Great, driven out of Gallycia in Spaine: Vassaeus. for out of those parts they will needs have it, that they came into Ireland. If they demand, who those Barbarians were? I doubt not but they will bee of the same minde with me, that they were Germans. For during the raigne of Gallienus the Emperour, the Germans dwelling in the farthest parts (saith Orosius ) of Germanie, spoiled and held Spaine in subjection: and who should those remote Germans bee, un∣lesse they were meere Scythians? but Aurelius Victor, whom Andrew Schot hath published, called those Germans Or Fank∣ners. Frankes. But seeing those Frankes and Ger∣mans, inhabiting the farthest parts of Germanie, putting to sea from thence, sailed in their heate and furie farre into the Ocean, and as Nazarius saith unto Constantine, greatly annoied, and did much harme by these our seas, even to the Spanish coasts also, who will believe that they preferred the dry and barren soile of Biscay, before Ireland, an Isle most fruitful, and fitly scited to endamage Spain? Nay rather, as in the time of Charles the Great, and afterwards, the Norwegians out of Scandia, did of∣ten attempt and invade Ireland, yea, and seated themselves there: so wee may with good probabilitie conjecture, that the Frankes did the same before; and that they pas∣sed from hence into Spain; and after they were driven out thence by Constantine the Great, retired backe againe into Ireland. Credible likewise it is, that more of them afterwards flocked thither, what time as the Vandales and Gothes depopulated Spaine, Orasius lib. 7. and as barbarous nations, warred among themselves, and made havocke of all: as also, when any storme of Sarazens lay sore upon the Spaniards, and drave a great number of them into Gallycia and Biscay. But I leave these overtures unto others for to prie further into: let it be sufficient for me, that I have beene but willing onely to remoove this cloud out of the way. But I beseech the learned Scots in this place to consider here, how it commeth to passe, that the Irish being the ancient forefathers and Progenitors of the Scots, yea, and the Scots themselves, beare them highly of this, that they be called Gael and Gai∣othel, and their Language Gaiothlac, as also why they named that part of Britaine, which they first possessed, Argathel? Whence can they say, that these names sprang? From the Gallaeci in Spaine, from whom very many, no doubt, flitted over into Ire∣land, and whose beginning is fetched from the Gallatae or Galles? or from the Goths, as some later Writers are of opinion, who would have this word Gaiothel to proceed from the Gothes, as likely as Catholonia did in Spaine? Here should they have drawn arguments from the affinitie, between the Gothicke Language, and the Irish: which not withstanding, so farre as ever I could finde, hath no resemblance at all of any o∣ther tongues in all Europe, save onely of the * Welch and Dutch. How truly Hen∣ry Huntingdon writeth; The Scots came in the fourth age of the world out of Spaine in∣to Ireland: and part of them who still remained there, useth as yet the same Language, and are called Navarrians: how truely (I say) he hath delivered this, let others speake. And here I omit David Chambres the Scotish-man, who hath beene enformed by cer∣taine Jesuites, that the Scottish tongue is used in East India. I am afraid lest that countrey so farre remote as it is, made the credulous man bold, not to make a lie, but to tell a lie. But if arguments in this case may bee taken from the habite and apparell of the people, surely the array and clothing of the wild Scots at this day, is all one with that of the Gothes in times past; as wee may by and by perceive out of Sidonius Apolli∣naris, who in describing a Goth, portraieth & depainteth unto us a wild Scot, as right as may be. They are (saith he) of a flaming deepe yellow, died with saffron; they buckle upon their feete a paire of Broges made of raw and untanned leather up to their ankles; their knees, thighes, and calves of their legs are all bare; their garments high in the necke, straight made, and of sundry colours, comming scarce downe to their hammes; the sleeves cover the upper points of their armes and no more; their souldiers coats of colour greene, edged with a red fringe; their belts hanging downe from the shoulder; the lappets of their eares hidden under the curled Flagella cri∣nium. glibbes and lockes of haire lying all over them, (For so a man may very rightly call, the manifold branched, and parted twists of haire, which That is, the Redshanks. Scots & Irish weare) they use also hooked Speares, which Gildas termeth, Vncinata tela, and axes to fling from them. Vpon Ho∣race, De arte Poetica. They wore likewise strait bodied coats ( as saith Porphyrio) fitted close to their breasts, without girdles. If this bee not for all the world the very right apparell of the wild Irish-Scots, let themselves be Judges. I would withall, they did consider these words of Giraldus Cambrensis, in his first booke of The Institution of a Prince. When Maximus (saith he) was passed out of Britaine into Gaule, with the whole power of men, forces, and armour, that the Island could make, and all to seize into his hands the Em∣pire, Gratian and Valentinian brethren, and partners in the Empire, shipped over these Gothes, (a Nation hardie and valiant in feats of armes, being also either confederate with them, or subject and obliged unto them for benefits, which they had received of the Emperours) from the borders of Scythia, into the North parts of Britaine, for to annoy the Britans, and cause the said Vsurper to returne backe with his forces. But they, because they were exceeding puissant, (such was the inbred valour and warlike nature of the Gothes,) and withall finding the Island destitute both of men and other meanes to defend it, becom∣ming of pirats, and rovers neighbour dwellers, planted themselves in the said Northerne parts, and held by strong hand no small Provinces thereof, which they usurped as their owne. Now, who these Gothes were, let others shew, and peradventure out of Pro∣copius, they may find some light; Lib. 2. de bell Gothorum. in whom we read, That Belisarius, when the Goths expostulated with him, for that he had granted Sicilie to the Romans, answereth in these words: And wee likewise permit the Gothes to have unto themselves Britaine a farre better countrey than Sicilie, and in ancient time subject to the Roman Empire: For, meete it is, that they who first have bestowed benefits, should either reape condigne thankes againe, or receive good turnes reciprocally. To this also may seeme to bee referred, that the Scots write, How Fergusius the Scot, accompanied Alaricke the Goth in the sacking of Rome: that Irenicus likewise reporteth, How Gensricke King of the Vandals came over unto Scotland and Britaine: Lib. 6. cap. 25 as also, that which Cambrensis delivereth unto us, (but whence himselfe had it, I know not) namely, how the Gaideli, that is to say, the Scots, drew both their discent, and also their name from the Vandals, who were all one with the Gothes, as Paulus Diaconus sheweth. Neither can it be any disparage∣ment at all to the name and nation of the Scots, to acknowledge themselves the of∣spring of the Gothes, seeing that the most puissant Kings of Spaine, thinke it an ho∣nour to fetch their pedigree from hence; and the noblest houses in all Italie, either draw indeed, or else falsifie their lineall descent from the Gothes. The Emperor him∣selfe Charles the fifth, would often times give out, and that in good earnest; that all the Nobilitie of Europe came out of Scandia, and from the stocke of the Gothes. But these reasons are not of such credit and importance with mee, as that I dare thereupon re∣solve that the Scots are sprung and issued from the Gothes. Diodorus Si∣ ulus. Now, to end all in a word, I would have the learned Scots to consider seriously, whether they were of those most ancient Britans Inhabitants of Ireland (For, certaine it is that Britans in times past inhabited Ireland) and called Scythae or Scoti, because they suted so well with Scythians in manners: or Scythians indeed, such as came out of Scandia or Scythia, unto whom the Gallaeci, Franci, or Germanes driven out of Spaine, and Gothes or Vandals came afterwards, what time as Spaine with most hot and bloody warres was all in combustion: or rather a mishmash of sundry nations which conflowed into Ireland, and thereupon gat that name among other neighbors. The language, saith Giraldus, of the Irish is called Gaidelach, as one would say, ga∣thered out of all tongues. An Dom. 77. Scot. And Florilegus (whencesoever he gathered it); From Picts and Irish, quoth he, the Scots tooke their beginning, as people compounded of divers na∣tions: For that is called Scot, which from sundry things groweth into one heape. Like as the Almanes (by the testimonie of Asinius Quadratus) carried that name, Almans. Agath. lib. 1. because they came of a commixture of divers men. Neither may any man thinke it strange, that so many nations in old time flowed into Ireland, considering the scite of that Island in the very midst betweene Britan and Spaine, and lying open so conveniently upon the French sea: seeing also it appeareth most certainly upon record, in the best approved Annals, that within these eight hundred yeares last passed the Norwegi∣ans, and Oustmans, that is, Easterlings out of Germany, the Englishmen, Welchmen, and Scots out of Britaine, planted themselves surely there. These are the points, I say, which I would wish the Scotish men in this matter diligently to thinke upon. But let them remember in the meane time, that I have affirmed nothing, but onely given an inkling of certaine things, which may seeme in some sort materiall and to make for the purpose. Whence, if the originall of the Scots shall receive no light, let them seek else where: For, I my selfe in this am stark blind, and have in vaine searched and hunted after the truth, that flieth still from me; howbeit with this considerate and circumspect care, that I have not, I hope, given the least offence to any whomso∣ever. When the Scots came into Britaine. Touching the time when the name of Scots became first famous, there is some question; and Buchanan a right good Poet, hath herein commenced an action against Humfrie Lhuid as good an Antiquarie: Because the said Lhuid averreth, that the name of Scots can no where be picked out of Authors before the time of Constantine the Great; he fals upon the man, is ready to take him by the throat, and with two silly arguments goeth about to give them the deadly stab; the one out of the Panegyrist, the other grounded upon a bare conjecture. Because we finde in the old Panegyrist, that Britaine in Caesars time was wont to be troubled with Irish enemies; therefore, the Scots as then were seated in Britaine: but no man before him ever said, that so much as those Irish had then any settled place, much lesse, that they were Scots. No doubt, the Panegyrist, after the usuall and received manner of writers, spake according to his owne times, and not unto Caesars. And as for the conjecture, it is none of his owne, but the conjecture of that most learned Joseph Scaliger. For he in his notes up∣on Propertius, whiles he was correcting (by the way) of that verse out of Seneca his enterlude; The Britans those that seated are beyond the knowne sea-coast And Brigants with blew painted shields, he forced with his hoast; To yield their necks in Roman chaines are captives to be led, And even the Ocean this new power of Roman ax to dread. Ille Britannos Vltra noti Littora Ponti Et caeruleos Scuta Brigantes Dare Romuleis Colla Catenis Iussit, &c. readeth Scoto-Brigantes, and straightwaies exclaimeth, that the Scots are now behol∣den unto him for their originall. But to this his opinion I cannot yield assent, though it be somewhat against my will, As also for their Etymo∣logie in his notes upon Eusebius Chronology. See them. who in many things have alwaies for his learning honored and admired the man. For, this conjecture ariseth not from the divers rea∣dings in bookes, but out of his owne braine: and the sense may beare, either [ Caeruleos Scuta Brigantes ] as it is in all bookes, or [ Caeruleos cute Brigantes ] that is, the Brigan∣tes with blue died skins, as that most learned Hadrian Iunius readeth it. But Bucha∣nan, who had rather disport himselfe sweetly in his owne conceit and the witty inven∣tion of one other, than to judge aright with the usuall and approoved reading of that place, giveth a marvellous applause to this conjecture. First, because authors do not record that the Britans painted their shields; Then, for that Seneca called them Scoto-Brigantes for difference sake, to distinguish them from the Brigantes of Spaine and Ireland: Last of all, because in these verses hee makes a distinction betweene the Bri∣tans and Brigantes, as though they were divers nations. But if one would narrowlie sift and examine these matters what letteth but that they might paint their shields as well as themselves and their chariots? Why should he for distinction sake, coine this new word, Scoto-Brigantes ? when he calleth them blew, and saith they were subdu∣ed by Claudius, doth he not sufficiently distinguish them from the other Brigantes? But that observation of his touching Britans and Brigantes, as if they were divers na∣tions, doth scarse favour of a Poets head, which could not be ignorant of that poeti∣call figure, and manner of speaking, wherein a part is used for the whole, and contra∣riwise. Wherefore, seeing these things make nothing to his cause, I will second Bu∣chanan by way, as it were, of a fresh supply, with the aid of Egesippus, (who is com∣monly reputed a verie ancient writer:) For, thus writeth he, where he treateth of the Romans power: They make That is, Ire∣land. See in Ireland and before. Lib. 5. cap. 15. Scotland to quake, which is beholden to no land for any thing: before them, Saxony trembleth, that for Marishes is inaccessible. But heare you me, this au∣thor shal stand behind in the rereward, for he lived after Constantines daies, as may be gathered out of his owne writings: neither can it bee prooved out of him, that the Scots dwelt in Britain, no more than out of that verse of Sidonius which erewhile I al∣leaged. Yea mary, but there is another reason of more weight and moment indeed, which M. Iohn Crag, a right famous and learned man, found by most exquisite and cu∣rious search in Ioseph Ben-Gorion, writing of the destruction of Ierusalem, to wit, that in an Hebrew copie, the Scots are expresly named, where Munster in his Latine tran∣slation hath untruely put downe Britans for Scots. But in what age that Ben-Gori∣on lived, I cannot find for certaine; sure I am, that hee was after Flavius Iosephus, be∣cause he maketh mention of the Franks, whose name long after began to be knowne. But surely, if I may be so bold as to interpose my selfe in this question, among so great Scholars: so farre as I have beene able to observe, the first time that ever the Scotish nation became named in authors, was whiles Aurelianus was Emperour. For Pophyrie, who then wrote against the Christians, as Vnto Cre i∣phon against Pelagians. Saint Ierome informeth us, mentioned them in these words: Neither Britaine, a fertile Province of tyrants, nor the Scotish nations, together with the barbarous people round about, as farre as to the Ocean, had any knowledge of Moses and the Prophets. At which time verily, or somewhat be∣fore, those that are well seene in Antiquities have noted, that the names of the most potent nations of French and Almanes, were not heard of before the time of Galli∣enus the Emperour. It is no assured truth therefore, which some write, That the name and Kingdome of the Scots flourished in Britaine many hundred yeeres before the birth of Christ. But hearken to Girald, who will tell you the just time: When Great O-Nel (saith he) held the Monarchie of Ireland, six sonnes of Mured King of Vlster, seized upon the North parts of Britaine. Hereupon from them was there a nation propagated, which by a peculiar name called, Scotica, that is, Scotish, inhabiteth that part even to this day. And that this be∣fel at the very time when the Roman Empire in every mans sight grew to decay, it is collected thus. Whiles Lagerius the sonne of that O-Nel raigned over the Irish, Pa∣trick (the Apostle of the Irish-men) came into Ireland, much about the yeere after Christs nativitie 430. So as it may seeme, this hapned neere the daies of Honorius Emperour. Augustus. For then, whereas before time, ranging up and downe without any cer∣taine place of abode (as Ammianus doth report) they had long annoyed Britaine and the places appointed for the Marches, they seeme to have set their footing in Bri∣taine. But they themselves will have it thus, that they did but returne then out of Ireland, whither they had retired before, what time they were put to flight by the Britans, and driven away: and so they understood that place out of Gildas, of this very time; The Irish spoilers returne home, minding shortly to come backe againe. And much about this time, Beda. lib. 1. ca. 1. some think that Reuda, (whom Bede mentioneth) either by force and armes, or through favour planted himselfe in this Island, upon an arme of the river Cluid Northward. And of this Captaine Reuda (saith he) the Dalreudini, even to this day take their name. For, in their tongue, Dal, signifieth a part: and others think, that from this Reuda it was, that wee called the Irish-Scots, Redshanks. It is thought also, that the same Simon Brech, whom the Scots avouch to bee the founder of their nation, flourished in these daies. Sinbrech in truth was the name of the man, which is as much to say, as Sin, with the freckled face, as we read in Fordon. And peradven∣ture the same Brech he was, who about the time of S. Patricke, together with Thuibai, Mac-lei, and Auspac, Scots, infested Britaine, as wee read in the life of Saint Carantoc. But why the High-land Scots living in Britaine, call that countrey which they in∣habite, Alban and Albin. Alban, and Albin, and the Irish name it Allabany, were a question for an inge∣nuous and liberall wit to travell in: as namely, whether this word Allabany, may not have it in some token of the ancient Albion: or whether it came of white∣nesse, which they call Ban, and therefore may import as much in Scotish, as Ellan-Ban, that is, a white Island: or whether it bee derived of Ireland, which the Irish Poets name Banne ; so that Allabanny, may sound as much, as another Ireland, or a second Ireland. For, Historiographers were wont to call Ireland, Scotland the grea∣ter, and the Kingdome of the Scots in Britaine, Scotland the lesse. Moreover, seeing these Scots in their own language terme themselves Albin, Albin. Albinus. whereupon Blondus called the Scots, Albienses, or Albinenses, and Buchanan, Albini, let Criticks consider, whe∣ther that in Saint Ierome, where hee inveigheth against a certaine Pelagian, a Scot borne, it should not be read, Albinum for Alpinum, when hee taketh him up in these termes; The Albine Dogge. The great and corpulent Alpine dog; and who is able to doe more harme with his heeles, than his teeth: for he hath his of-spring of the Scotish nation, neere neighbours to the Britans: of whom also in another place, he said, that hee was full fatned with Scottish pottage & brewesse. Of Alpine dogs, I never remember that I have read ought; but that Scotish dogs were in much request at Rome in those daies, Symmachus sheweth unto us, Seven Scotish Dogs there were (saith he) the day going before the Games, which in Rome they wondred at so, as they thought they were brought thither in yron-grated Cages. But after that the Scots were come into Britaine, and had joyned themselves unto the Picts, albeit they never ceased to vexe the Britans with skirmishes and in-roades, yet grew they not presently up to any great state, but kept a long time in that cor∣ner, where they first arrived, not daring (as Beda writeth) for the space of one hun∣dred and seven and twentie yeares to come forth into the field, Lib. 1 cap. ult. against the Princes of Northumberland; untill at one and the same time, they had made such a slaughter of the Picts, that few or none of them were left alive: and withall the Kingdome of Northumberland, what with civill dissentions and invasions of the Danes, sore shaken and weakned, fell at once to the ground. For then, all the Northerne tract of Bri∣taine, became subject to them, and tooke their name, together with that hithermore countrey on this side Cluid, Bede. and Edenburgh Frith. For, that it also was a parcell of the Kingdome of Northumberland, and possessed by the English-Saxons, no man gain-saieth: and hereof it is, that all they which inhabit the East part of Scotland, and be called Lowland men, as one would say, of the Lower-countrey, are the very of-spring of the English-Saxons, and doe speake English. But they that dwell in the West coast, named Highland men, as it were, of the upper countrey, be meere Scots, and speake Irish, as I have said before: and none are so deadly enemies, as they be un∣to unto the Lowland men, which use the English tongue as we doe. Ammianus Marcellinus writeth, that together with the Scots, ATTACOTTI, a warlike people, did much mischiefe unto Britaine; and those Humfrey Lhuid, gues∣seth, (how truely I know not) to have beene also of the Scotish nation. Attacotti. Saint Ierome telleth us plainely, that they were a British people. For he writeth, that when he was a very youth, Lib. 2. contra Iovianum. ( while Iulian as it seemeth was Emperour ) he saw in Gaule the Attacots, a British nation, feed of mans flesh, who when they found in the Forrests heards of swine, flockes of neat and other cattell, were wont to cut off the buttockes of their heard-men, and keepers, the dugs also and paps of the women, and account the same the onely dainties in the world. For, so according to the true Manuscript copies we are to read in this place, Attacotti [and not Scoti with Erasmus] who acknowledgeth this text to be corrupted: Although I must needs confesse, that in one Manuscript wee read Attigotti, in ano∣ther Catacotti, and in a third Cattiti. Neither can this passage bee any waies under∣stood as the vulgar sort take it, of the Scots: considering that Saint Ierome treating there of the sundry orders and manners of divers nations, beginneth the next sentence following in this wise: The nation of the Scots hath no proper wives of their owne, &c. In another place also, where Saint Ierome maketh mention of the Attacotti, Erasmus put∣teth downe for them, Azoti. These Attacoti, as appeareth by the booke called No∣titiae, served under the Romans in their warres, in the very decaying and declining state of their Empire. For, reckoned there are among the Palatine aids within Gaul, Atte∣cotti Iuniores Gallicani, and Attecotti Honoriani Seniores: also, within Italie, Attecotti Honoriani Iuniores. By this addition Honoriani, they seeme to be of the number of those Barbarians, whom Honorius the Emperour entertained, and to no small dammage of the Empire enrolled as souldiers to serve in his warres. Among these nations also, which made rodes and invasions into Britain, Iohn Cai∣us, a man much exercised with cares and endevours of the best kind, and one who hath passing well deserved of our Common-wealth of learning, reckoneth the Ambrones. Ambrones, for that he red in Gildas, where he writeth of Picts and Scots, thus: Those former e∣nemies, like Ambrones, Wolves, even enraged for extreame hunger, with dry jawes leaping o∣ver the sheep-fold whiles the shepheard is out of the way, being carried with the wings of ores and armes of rowers, set forward also with sailes helped with gales of winde, breake thorow the bounds, killing and slaying all where they came. This good meaning old man thought of that which hee had read in Festus, namely, that the Ambrones, together with the Cimbri, flocked by numbers into Italie: and being busied about another matter, it was quite out of his head, that [ Ambro ] as Isidorus noteth, doth signifie, a Devourer. Nei∣ther doth Gildas use that word in any other sence, nor Geffrey of Monmouth, who called the Saxons also, Ambrones: nor any other Ambrones than these, could my selfe hitherto ever find in ancient Writers, to have invaded Britaine. ENGLISH-SAXONS. W Hen as now the Romane Empire under Valentinian the younger did more than decline, and Britaine being exhaust through so many le∣vies of all able men, Anglo-Sax∣ons. and abandoned of the Romane garisons, could no longer withstand the force of Scots and Picts; Vortigern, whom the Britans had made their Soveraigne and chiefe Governour, Who also is called Guor∣tigern. or who (as others thinke) had usurped the Monarchie, to the end that he might establish his imperiall rule, and recover the State falling to ruine: (much awed hee was, saith Ninnius, by the Picts and Scots, he stood in feare of the Ro∣manes forces, and was afraid of Aurelius Ambrosius) sent for the Saxons out of Ger∣manie to aide him: who forthwith under the conduct of Hengist and Horsa, with their Ciules (for so they called their Flat-boats or Pinnaces) arrive in Britaine, and after they had in one or two battels gotten the victorie against the Picts and Scots, became verie much renowned: and seeing the Britans still relying upon their manhood and courage, they send for greater forces out of Germany, which should keepe watch and ward upon the borders, and annoy the enemies by land and sea. Guortigern (saith Nin∣nius) by the advice of Hengist, sent for Octha and Ebissa to come and aid him: who being embarqu'd in 40. Cyules or Pinnaces, and sailing about the Picts coasts wasted the Isles called Orkney Isles. Orcades, yea and got many Isles and Countreys beyond the Mare Fresi∣cum. Frith, as farre as to the confines of the Picts. But at length, after they had begun to fall in love with the Lands, the civill fashions, and riches of Britaine, presuming upon the weaknes of the Inhabitants, and making the default of pay, and want of victuals their quarrell, they entred into league with the Picts, and raised a most bloodie and mortall warre against the Britans, who had given them entertainment: they kill and slay them in every place being put in affright and amazednesse, Aurelius Am∣brosius. Gildas cal∣leth him, Am∣brosius Aure∣lianus. their fields they harrie, their cities they raze, and after many doubtfull events of battell, fought against those two bulwarks of warre, Aurelius Am∣brosius, who here tooke upon him to weare the purple roabe, wherein his parents were killed, and that warlike Arture, they disseize the Britans of the more fruitfull part of the Isle, and drive them out of their ancient possessions. At which time, to speake all in a word, the most miserable Inhabitants suffred whatsoever either conquerour might dare, or the conquered feare. For, supplies of aide flocked together daily out of Ger∣manie, which still should renew warre upon warre against the wearied Britans: to wit, Saxons, Iutes, (for so must we read, and not Vites) and Angles, who by these proper names were knowne one from another, although generally, they were called English, and Saxons. But let us treat of these in severall, and summarily, that if it be possible we may have a sight of our originall, and first cradles. Howbeit, first will I adde hereto that which Witichindus, being himselfe both a Saxon borne, and also a writer of good antiquitie; hath related, as touching the comming in of the Saxons. Britaine (saith hee) being by Vespasian the Emperour long since reduced among Provinces, and under the vassalage of the Romanes, standing them in stead, and serving to good use a long time, became assailed by their neighbour-nations: for that it seemed destitute, and abandoned of the Romans helpe. For, the people of Rome, after that the Emperour Haply, Mar∣tian. Martial was by his souldiers killed, being sore tired out with forraigne warres, was not able to assist their friends with supply of accustomed aides. Yet neverthe∣lesse, the Romanes having built a mightie peece of worke for the defence of the Countrey, reaching betweene the confines from sea to sea, where it was thought that the enemies would assaile the Inhabitants, left the Land. But no difficultie it was for the enemie fiercely bent and alwaies ready to wage warre (especially where they deale with a nation, feeble and una∣ble to make warlike resistance) to destroy the said worke. Therefore hearing by report of the worthy and fortunate exploits, atchieved by the Saxons, they send an humble Embassage to require their helping hand: and so the Embassadors having audience given them, came forth and spake, as followeth. Most noble Saxons, The poore and distressed Brets, for Britans. Brets out-toiled, and over-tired by the many incursions of their enemies, hearing the fame of those victories which yee have valorously atchieved, have sent us suppliants unto you, cra∣ving that yee would not denie us your helpe and succour. A large and spatious Land, plen∣tifull and abundant in all things. they yeeld whollie to be at your devotion and command. Hitherto have we lived liberally under the patronage and protection of the Romanes: after the Romans, we know none of more prowesse than your selves: and therefore wee seeke for refuge under the wings of your valour. So that we may by your puissant vertue and armes, be found onely superiour to our enemies, what service soever ye impose upon us, willing we are to abide the same. To this petition the Peeres and Nobles of the Saxons briefly made answere in this wise. Know yee, that the Saxons will be fast friends unto the Brets, and prest at all times, both to assist them in their necessitie, and also to procure their wealth and commoditie. With joy returne these Embassadours home, and with this wished for tidings, make their countrey-men more joyfull, Hereupon according to promise, an armie sent into Britaine, and joyfully received, in short time freeth the Land from the spoiling enemies, and recovered the countrey unto the behoofe of the Inhabitants. For, the performance hereof required no great labour: the enemies who had long since heard of the Saxons, were terrified with the verie fame that was bruited of them: so that their very presence drave them farre off, For these were the nations that troubled the Brets, namely, Scots and Picts. Pehits: against whom, the Saxons whiles they maintaine warres, received of the Brets all things necessary. They abode therefore in that country a good while, making use in civill sort of the Brets friendship reciprocally. But so soone as the Chieftaines of the armie saw the countrey to be large and fertile, and withall the hands of the Inhabitans slow to practise feats of armes: and considered therewith, that themselves, and the greatest part of the Saxons, had no certaine place to seat themselves in, they send over to call unto them a greater power and more forces. Thus having concluded peace with the Scots and Pehits, they rise all together in common against the Brets, drive them out of the countrey, and divide the Land at their pleasure, as if it were their owne. Thus much Witichindus. The originall and Etymologie of the Saxons, like as of other nations, not onely Monkes ignorant, as they were, in learned antiquitie, but also latter Writers, being men of some exact and exquisite judgment, have enwrapped with forged and fained fables, Some derive them and their name from Saxo, the sonne of Negnon, and bro∣ther of Vandalus others from their stonie nature: some from the remaines of the Ma∣cedonian armie; others of certaine knives, whereupon was made that rhyme in Engel∣husius: Quippe brevis gladius apud illos Saxa vocatur, Vnde tibi nomen, Saxo traxisse putatur. For, Sax, with them, and Short-sword, is the same, From whence it's thought, the Saxon tooke his name. But Crantzius deriveth them from the Catti in Germanie: and that learned Cap∣nio from the Phrygians. Of these, let every man follow which he liketh best: For, such conjectural opinions as these, I will not labour to disproove. Howbeit, that conceit of the best learned Germans may seeme worthy of acceptance, Saxons, from the Sacae in Asia. and to bee preferred before the rest, who suppose that the Saxons descended from the Sacae, a most noble Nation, and of much worth in Asia, and so called, as one would say, Sacosones, that is, the sonnes of the Sacae: and that out of Scythia, or Sarmaria Tartarie. Asiatica, they came in companies by little and little, together with the Getae, Suevi, Daci, and others into Eu∣rope. Neither is this opinion of theirs improbable, which fetcheth the Saxons out of Asia, Lib. 11. Mela cthon Cisnerus. wherein mankind was first created and multiplied: for, besides that Strabo wri∣teth, how those Sacae (as before time the Cimerij) made invasions into countreys which lay farre off, and termed a part of Armenia after their owne name Sacacena: Ptolomee also placeth the Sassones, Suevians, Massagetes and Daci in that part of Scy∣thia: and Cisner observeth, that these Nations retained the same vicinitie or neigh∣borhood in a manner in Europe, which was among them in former times when they were in Asia. Neither is it lesse probable, Michael N ∣ander. that our Saxons descended from these Sacae or Sassones in Asia, (call them whether you will) than the Germanes from those Germanes in Persia, of whom Herodotus maketh mention: which they themselves after a sort doe affirme, by reason of the affinitie of their Language: for, that singular Scholer Ioseph Scaliger sheweth, that these words, Fader, Moder, Tutchter, Band, and such like, are at this day found in the Persian tongue, in the same sence as we use, Father, Mother, Bro∣ther, Daughter, and Bond. But when the Saxons began first to bee of any name in the world, they had their abode in Cimbrica Chersonesus, which wee now call Denmarke, wherein Ptolomee placeth them, who was the first author (as far as I find) that men∣tion them. For, we should not indeed read, Saxones, (as it is in some bookes) but more truly, Axones, peo∣ple of Gaule. Axones, in that verse of Lucan: —Longis{que} leves Axônes in armis: And Axons in side armour light and nimble.— Out of this Cimbrica Chersonesus in the time of Dioclesian, they (with the Frankes their neighbours) troubled our coasts and the seas with Piracie, in so much as for the defence of the countrey, and to repell them, the Romanes made Carausius their Generall. Afterwards they having passed over the river Elbe. Zosimus. Albis, part of them by little and little gat footing within the seat and territorie of the Suevians, where now is the Dukedome of Saxonie, and part of them bestowed themselves in Frisland and Hol∣land, which now the Frankes had quite forsaken. For, those Frankes who before time had inhabited those inmost Fennes of Frisland (whereof some, by overflowes and flouds, are growne to be that sea, which at this day they call Zuider-sea) and pos∣sessed themselves of Holland, then called Batavia, under Constantius Chlorus, Con∣stantine the Great, and his sonnes, being received as Liege-men, and translated from thence to inhabite the waste and desert countries of Gaule, either by the swords point making way into more plentifull regions, or else (as Zosimus writeth) driven out by the Saxons, departed out of Holland. From which time, all the people bordering upon that sea coast in Germanie, which were men of warre, and professed Piracie, as before they grew to be Franci, so now they became clepid Saxons: those Nations I meane, which inhabite Iutland, Sleswicke, Holst, Ditmarse, the Bishopricke of Breme, the countie of Oldenburgh, both East and West Frisland, and Holland. For the nation of the Saxons, Ethelward, Son to King Adulph in the fourth degree, flou∣rished the yeere 950. (as Fabius Quaestor Ethelward, himselfe descended of the Saxons roy∣all bloud, writeth) was wholly all that upon the seacoast, from the river Rhene unto the citie Donia, and which now is commonly called Dane-Marc. Which author▪ (that I may ac∣knowledge by whom I have profited) master Thomas Allen of Oxford an excellent man, and one endued with very many singular Arts, first found out, and of his cour∣tesie imparted the same unto me, with many others. Out of this Maritime tract, the Saxons fleshed now with the slaughter of many Ro∣manes, brake many times into the Romans provinces, and for a great while annoied this Iland, untill Hengist himselfe came: Who out of Batavia or Holland, sailed into Britaine, and built that Castle of Leiden in Holland, as not onely the Hollanders An∣nals doe testifie, but also that noble Ianus Dousa, a man of excellent wit and learning: who of that Castle, versifieth thus: Quem circinato maenium ut ambitu, Ode 2. of Leiden. Sic arcuatis fornicibus novum Putatur Hengistus Britanno Orbe redux posuisse victor. Which Hengist, by report, when he Return'd from Britaine with victorie, Built new with walles in compasse round, And on vaults arched under ground. The Iutae, who had that name (as many thinke) from the Gutes, Getes, or Gothes (for in a manuscript booke, we read Geatun ) did for certaine inhabite the upper part of Cimbrica Chersonesus, Spartianus Trebellius Pol∣lio Capitolinus, &c. which still the Danes call Iuitland: descended haply of those Guttae, whom Ptolomee hath placed in Scandia, whose habitation this day is called Gothland. But take heede you thinke not with Iornandes, that this was the na∣tive country of those Gothes, who with victorious conquests over-ran all Europe: for, the most ancient and best approoved writers have recorded unto us, that they dwelt beyond the river Alias, Danu∣bius Don w. Ister fast by Pontus Marmajore. Euxinus, and were before time called Getae. Angles, or Englishmen. But, in what place the Angles were seated, it is a question, neither are all men of one opinion. Most authors place them in Westphalia, where Engern standeth, and where the Suevians, whom Tacitus and Ptolomee make mention of, had their abode; whom I am willing to beleeve, if wee speake of the age of Tacitus: but I suppose, that from thence they came downe to the tract by the sea side. Others seeke for them in Pomerania, where the towne Angloen flourisheth. But seeing these reach into the more inland parts of Germany far from our seas, surely we must seek for some other seat of our Angles or Englishmen: Lib. 1. cap. 15. which Beda willed me to looke for between the Saxons and Iutes. The Angles (quoth he) came out of that countrey which is called Angulus, and is reported from that time to lie waste, betweene the Provinces of the Saxons and Iutarum. So readeth the Manu∣script, and not Vit r m. Iutes. Now seeing that between Iuitland and Holsatia the ancient countrey of the Saxons, there is a little Province in the Kingdome of Dania, named at this day Angel, Angel in Denmarke, the seat of the English, or Angles. beneath the citie Flemsburg, which Lindebergius in his Epistles calleth Little Anglia: I dare affirme, that now at length, I have found the place of our ancestors habitation, and that from thence the Angles came into this Iland. And to averre this the more confidently, I have good warrant from the authoritie of that ancient writer Ethelwardus, whose words be these: Old Anglia is sited between the Saxons and the Giots: they have a capitall towne, which (in the Saxon tongue) is named Sleswic: but the Danes call it Haithby. In which verie place, Ptolomee seemeth to set the Saxons. So that a Poet of the middle time, sung not untunably in this manner: —Saxonia protulit Anglos, Hoc patet in lingua, niveo{que} colore.— That Englishmen from Saxons draw descent, Their colour Faire. white and tongue make evident. Of these Angles, some part having passed forward into the inmore quarters of Ger∣manie, being blended with the Longobards and the Suevians went, as farre as Italie, and are thought to have left their footing in Engelheim, the native countrey of Charles the Great, Ingolstad, Engleburg, Englerute in Germanie, and Angleria in Italie. But what the reason or Etymologie is of the name, I dare not definitively pronounce. A∣way with that Angulus the son of Humblus: and with Queene Angela, whom foolish folke babble to have beene the founders of our Nation. Neither thinke we that their name was imposed of Angulus, that is, An angle or corner; as if it were a corner of the world, as some building upon that stale verse, seeme to hold: Anglia terra ferax, & fertilis angulus orbis, Insula praedives, quae toto vix eget orbe: England a fruitfull angle, is without the world so wide, An Iland rich, that hath small need of all the world beside. Neither doth Goropius his conjecture deserve credit, but rather a smile, which deriveth Anglos, that is, Englishmen, from Angle, that is, A fishing rod, or a Fish∣hooke; because (saith he) they hooked all unto them, and were, as we say, Good An∣glers. But he that seeth the Etymologie, De bello Gothi∣co. lib. 4. of Engelbert, Englehard, and such like Dutch names, may see perhaps the originall of Angli also. Moreover, it may seeme out of Procopius, that the Frisones likewise came with others into Britaine. The text whole as it lieth (for that the booke is not commonly extant in print) I will not thinke much here to set downe, even as Franciscus Pithaeus a singular good man, and in all sorts of Antiquitie most skilfull, hath exemplified it unto me, out of the Kings Libra∣ry in Paris: , That is, according to my grosse translation, thus: The Iland Bri∣taine, three most populous nations doe inhabite, which have everie one their severall King to rule them: and these Nations be called Angili, Frisones, and after the name of the very Iland, Britones. Now they seeme to be so great a multitude of people, that every yeere a mightie number of them, with their wives and children, flit from thence unto the Franks: and they give them entertainment in that part of their Land, which seemeth most desert a∣bove the rest: and hereupon men say, they challenge unto themselves the verie Iland. And verily, not long since, when the King of the Franks, sent certaine of his people in Embassage to Constantinople unto the Emperour Iustinian, he sent withall some English, pretending am∣bitiously, that this Iland was under his dominion. These are the people of Germanie, that planted themselves in Britaine, who, that they became one nation, Saxons, An∣gles, and Iutes one na∣tion. and were called by one generall name, one while Saxons another while, Englishmen, and English-Saxons, for difference of those that are in Germanie, may be gathered most truly, out of Gildas, Beda, Saint Boniface, Pau∣lus Diaconus, and others: but most commonly in Latine, Angli, Gens Anglica ; and in their tongue, to the same sence, Engla theod. About the time when they were admitted into Britaine by Vortigern, writers doe not agree: Anglo-Sax∣ons, when they came into Britaine. but to omit others, Bede and those that follow him, make this computation of those most confused times. In the one and thirtieth yeere of Theodosius the younger, and of Christ 430. The Britans pitiously crave aid, but in vaine, of or Aetius. Aetius the third time Consul, for that they were sore oppressed by the Picts and Scots. Under Valentinian the third, Saint German once or twice came into Britaine against the Pelagians, and after he had powred out his praiers unto God, led an armie [of Britans] against the Picts and Saxons, and gained the victorie. In the first yeere of Martianus, and the yeere of our Lord 449, the nation of the English-Saxons arrive in Britaine. But seeing it appeareth for certaine by the or Register. Fasti Consula∣res. Kalender of the Consuls, that the third Consulship of Aetius fell out to be in the 39. yeere of the said Theodosius, and after the birth of Christ 446. as also by the best and most approoved authors, that Saint German died in the yeere of Grace 435: justly wee may suspect, that those numbers in Beda were corrupted, and that the Saxons had footing given them here, before the yeere of our Lord 449. For otherwise, how could it be, that S. German, who departed this life An. Do. 435, should conduct the Britans against the Saxons, when as they were not yet come? Ninnius also writeth, that Saint German returned out of Britaine into his owne country after the death of Vortigern, Baronius. who received the Saxons into Britaine: so that of necessitie their comming in was before the yeere of our Lord 435, which was the yeere wherein Saint German ended his life. In like manner, in the second yeere after that Leo Magnus was created Bishop of Rome, which was in the yeere of Christ 443, Prosper Tyro who then lived, writeth, that Britaine after sundry overthrowes, was brought in subjection to the Saxons, so that they doubtlesse must needs come in before that time, namely, the yeere of Christ 449. But to take away all scruples, and cleere all doubts in this point, this one note of computation adjoyned unto some copies of Ninnius, which is unto me in stead of all, may suffice. From the Consulship of the two Gemini, Read Fusius. Rufus and Rubellius, unto Stilico the Consul, are reckoned 373. yeeres. Item, from Stilico unto Valentinian the son of Placidia, and to the raigne of Vortigern, be 28. yeeres. From the raigne of Vortigern unto the or battell. discord of Guitolin and Ambrose, are 12. yeeres. Which battell is Guoloppum, that is, Cathguoloph. Now Vortigern held the Kingdome of Britaine when Theodosius and Valentinian were Consuls: and in the fourth yeere of his raign, the Saxons came into Britaine, and were entertai∣ned by Vortigern, when Foelix and Taurus were Consuls. From the yeere wherein the Saxons came into Britaine, and were received by Vortigern, un∣to Elsewhere Decius Pau∣linus. Decius Valerianus, are 69. yeeres. By casting therefore the account thus, the comming in of the English Saxons in∣to Britaine, was in the 21. yeere of Theodosius the younger: and this commeth nee∣rest to the computation of Bede, in the yeere of our salvation 428. For then Foelix and Taurus bare their Consulship: and so all circumstances of persons and times doe well cohere. This moreover I thinke good to tell you of, although I will not take upon me to be a Criticke, that in most copies of Gildas, whence Beda had that note of Etius, we read Agitio 111. Consuli, in others without adjection of number, Aegi∣tio: and in one, Aequitio Cos. But to this day never could I see in the Register and Ka∣lender of Consuls, any Consul of that name: unlesse we might thinke that he was some Consul extraordinarie. Well, what time soever it was that they came in, they made good proofe of their singular valour and wisedome with all. For in a short space, their State, for number, for good customes and ordinances, The Saxons conquest. for lands and territories grew to that heighth, that it became most wealthy and puissant, yea, and their conquest in some sort full and absolute. For all the conquered, except some few, whom in the Westerne tract the roughnesse of the countrey defended and kept safe, became one nation, used the same lawes, tooke their name, and spake one and the selfe same language, with the conquerours. For, besides England it selfe, a great part of Scotland, being possessed by the English Saxons (and still to this day, the wilde and naturall Scots indeed, terme them Sassones) useth the same tongue that we do, varying a little in the Dialect one∣ly. Which tongue we and they together for the space now of 1150. yeeres, have kept after a sort uncorrupt, and with the possession also of the Land. So that now it is pro∣ved vaine and false, Gildas. (as other prophesies of that kind) which the Saxon Prophets fore∣told, when as they spred their sailes for this Iland, That they should inhabit here 300. yeeres and no more, and for one hundred and fiftie of them, often times waste and spoile the countrey. Now, the matter it selfe, and the place seeme to require, that somewhat should bee added as touching the ancient manners and demeanour of our Forefathers the Saxons: and surely, annex I will what I have observed in this behalfe. This nation of the Saxons, The Saxons Manners. was generally most warlike and martiall, For courage of minde, strength of bodie, enduring of labour and travell, reputed of all the Germans most valiant, as saith Zosimus. Most feared of the Romanes, because their invasions were sudden, as Marcellinus reporteth : Terrible for hardinesse and agilitie, as saith O∣rosius. Saxony is a region (by reason of Marishes) inaccessible, and environed with comber∣some countreys, and unpassable. Which things although they may make them more secure for war, and although it selfe also was led captive oftentimes to set out the Roman triumphs, yet have they the name to bee a most valorous kind of men; excelling all other in piracie: how∣beit, trusting in their swift pinnaces and flibotes (not in fine force) provided rather for flight than fight, as Egysippus recordeth of them. In imitation of whom, Isidorus writeth thus: The Nation of the Saxons seated upon the coasts of the Ocean sea, and among unpassa∣ble Marishes, is for valour and nimblenesse meet for service: and thereupon they tooke their name, as being a kinde of people stout, hardy, and most valiant, yea and redoubted above all other for piracie. Lib. 9 cap. 2. Originum. Men they are for their tall stature, the good feature of their limbs, and framing of their lineaments, conspicuous and notable. Whereupon Witi∣chindus the Monke, writeth thus of them; The Franks had these men in admiration for their excellencie as well in bodie as mind: they wondred at them for their new and strange▪ habite, for their armour also, and shoulders overspred with the haire of their head; but a∣bove all for their constant resolution, and valiant courage. Clad they were in souldiers cassocks, and weaponed with long speares) they trusted upon their little bucklers, and wore great knives or skeins at their backes. Howbeit, before time they used to shave their haire off, hard by the head to the very skinne, unlesse it were round about the crowne, and to weare a plate about their head, as Sidonius Apollinaris teacheth us in these verses: Istic Saxona carulum videmus Adsuetum antè salo, solum timere; Cujus verticis extimas per oras Non contenta suos tenere morsus, Altat lamina marginem comarum. Et sic crinibus ad cutem recissis, Decrescit caput, additurque vultus. The Saxons there in watcher clad, we see On land a fraid, who earst at sea were bold; Whose bush of haires about the crowne that be Plates not content to keepe their wonted hold Raise up in tufts, when all the rest is pold: The Scalpe beneath thus shaven to the skin, Their face seemes full, their heads but small and thin. As for their apparell, you may understand what it was out of these words of Pau∣lus Diaconus, as touching the Longobards. Their garments were large, and loose, and most of all linnen, such as the English Saxons are wont to weare, trimmed and set out with verie broad gards or welts purfled and embroydered with sundry colours. Most skilfull sea men they were, as who a long time lived as Pirats, so that being accustomed to the sea they were afraid, as he saith, of the land: and wrought so much mischiefe upon the sea-coasts of Britaine and France, The Saxons shores or coasts. as farre as to Spaine, that there were both Captaines and souldiers appointed all along the shores of both Countries to restraine their ro∣vings and depredations, who thereupon were called Counts or Earles of the Saxon shore along Britaine and France. And heereto tend these verses of Sidonius Apollinaris: Quîn & Aremoricus piratam Saxona tractus, Sperabat Comites lit∣toris Saxonici. cui pelle salum sulcare Britannum Ludus, & assuto glaucum mare findere lembo. The tract also that lies the Sea so neare, Hight Armoricke, did Saxon pirate Sperabat, for timebat. feare: Whose sport it is with leather-stitched boat, Of British Sea to cut the waves afloat. Yea and that which more is, within Gaule neere unto Armorica, they seazed into their hands and held a long time the Country about the Baieux. Baiocasses, as is to bee seene in Gregorius Turonensis, who termed them Saxones Baiocassinos, like as the com∣mon sort, Sesnes Bessins. But with how great cruelty they committed outraies along these shores, heare if it please you, Saxones Bai∣ocassini. Sidonius himselfe. The Messenger, (saith he) with whom we spent some time in talke, whiles for your sake we held him with us, constantly affirmed, that you of late sounded alarum at Sea, Lib. 8. Epist. ad Namantium. and performing the part in your owne person sometime of a souldier, & some∣times of a mariner, bestirred your selfe up and downe the winding shores of the Ocean, to af∣front the Ciuli. flat bottom barkes of the Saxons: Of whom as many rowers as you see, so many Archpirats you may thinke you beheld: They all of them together, so command, obey, teach, and learne to rob and steale; that even now also you have greatest cause to be warned, and to be most heedfull and wary of them. There is no enemie so cruell as this. He setteth upon o∣thers at unwares, himselfe slips away as warily: He setteth at nought such as encounter him; he bringeth to nought those that take no heed to him: whom he courseth, he surely overtaketh; when he flieth he is sure to escape. To this service, shipwracks inure him, they terrifie him not. Not onely skilfull they are in the dangers of sea, but also familiarly acquainted in some sort therewith. Be there a tempest up? the same of one side serveth to secure them were they in jeopardie to be taken; on the other side if they be to assaile others, it keepeth them from being descried and seene farre off. In the mids of waves and craggy rocks, they hazard their lives in hope of good successe. Besides this, before they take shipping into their owne Country and weigh their flowked anchors from the enemies shore, upon the point of returne, their manner is to kill every tenth captive with equall and By han∣ging them in∣differently one with an∣other. dolorous torment (a custome the more lamen∣table, because it is superstitious) and among the number of such as are gathered together to die, for to disperse the equity of lot, together with the iniquitie of death. With such vowes they bind themselves, with such sacrifices they pay their vowes, and not so much purified by such sacrifices, as polluted with sacrilegies, the bloudie and abominable murderers thinke it a religious thing, rather to torment a prisoner to death, than to set him free for a ransome. Hitherto also may be referred that, which we collect of the frag∣ment of an ancient Historie in Isodorus. The Saxons trust to their fly-boats and not to their strength, better appointed for flight than for fight. As also this testimonie of Sal∣vianus, who then lived, writing thus of Barbarous nations. The Alani are a people vicious and uncleane, but not so perfidious. The Franks be given to lying, howbeit full of hospitalitie and kind to strangers. The Saxons in cruelty outragious, yet for chastitie to be honoured. But so firme and resolute they were, (if I may be allowed to give it so good a terme) that they would chuse rather to kill themselves, and cast away their lives wilfully, than be mocked and laughed to skorne. And hereupon it was, that when Symmachus had provided a band of them against the publicke shewes which were to be ex∣hibited; the very day on which they should have beene brought forth into the Theatre, for sword play to kill one another, Lib. 2. Epist. 4 . they by strangling themselves prevented all hope of shew∣ing bloudy sport and pastime unto the people. Of whom Symmachus himselfe writeth thus: The band or company of Saxons is lessened by death. For, when as the private guard restrained not the liberty of the impious hands of those desperate people; the first day of the sword fight-shew, saw nine and twenty of their necks broken without any halter. Moreover, this nation of the Saxons was very much addicted to superstition, & for that cause when they were to consult of weighty and important matters, beside Sooth∣saying by inspection of beasts entrails, they observed especially the neighing of hor∣ses, as presaging things to come. And thence perhaps it is, that the Dukes of Saxonie in ancient time gave the horse in their Armes. But why our first Progenitours Hen∣gistus and Horsa, An horse the badge or cognisance of the Saxons. tooke their names of an horse, (for both their names in the Saxon tongue do signifie, an horse, ) surely I know not, unlesse it were for a lucky osse and fore∣token of their warlicke prowesse, according to that verse of Virgil. Bello armantur equi, Bella haec armenta minantur: For warre our horses armed are, These beasts also doe threaten warre. They used also casting and drawing of lots very much; for, they did cut downe a branch from some tree that bare fruit, and slived or cleft the same into slips and twigs, and when they had distinguished them with certain marks, These ceri∣monies A∣dam Bremen∣sis ascribeth to the Saxons which Taci∣tus attribu∣teth to the Suevians. they skattered them at hap∣hazard upon a white garment. Straight waies, if the consultation were publike, the Priest; if private, the goodman of the house, after prayers first unto the Gods, loo∣king up to heaven, tooke each of them up three times, and having lifted them up, they interpreted them according to the marke set before upon them. To trie out the event and issue of warres, they were wont to set a prisoner of that nation against which they denounced warre, and a man chosen out of their owne coun∣trimen, to fight together a combat, each of them with the weapon used in their coun∣trie; and so to guesse by him that was victour, which nation should goe away with victorie. Above all other Gods they worshipped Mercurie, whom they called Wooden, whose favour they procured by sacrificing unto him men alive; and to him they con∣secrated the fourth day of the weeke, The Saxons Gods. whereupon wee call it at this day, Wednesday: like as the sixth unto Venus, whom they named Frea or Frico, whence wee name that day Friday: Wednesday. Friday. Tuesday. even as we do Tuesday of Tuisco, the stocke-father of the German or Dutch nation. They had a Goddesse also named Eoster, unto whom they sacrificed in the mo∣neth of Aprill: and hence it commeth, saith De tempori∣bus. Eoster a goddesse. Beda, that they called April, Eoster, monath, and we still name the feast of the Resurrection, Easter ; but rather as I thinke of the rising of Christ, which our progenitors called East, as we do now that part whence the Sunne riseth. In generall (as saith Tacitus) the English and other neighbour-nations worshipped Herthus, that is, Dame Earth, for a Goddesse, and they had an opinion, that she intermediated in humane affaires, and relieved the people. And even with us in these daies, that word Earth is in use, Herthus, a goddesse. but growne out of use with Germans, who in stead of Earth, say, Arden. Of these superstitions that foresaid Ethelward writeth thus; respectively unto the time wherein he lived: Earth. So grievously seduced are the unbeleevers of the North, that unto this very day, the Danes, Normanes and Suevians, worship Woodan as their Lord: and in another place; The Barbarous people honoured Woodan as their God, and the Painims offred sacrifice unto him, that they might be victorious and valorous. But more fully Adam Bremensis setteth these things downe. In a temple, saith he (called in their vulgar and native speech Vbsola) which is made altogether of gold, the peo∣ple worship the statues of three Gods: in such maner as that, Thor, the mightiest of them hath onely a throne, Thursday hath name from this Thor. or bed: on either hand of him Woodan and Fricco hold their places. And thus much they signifie. Thor, say they, beareth rule in the aire, as who governeth thunder and lightning, winds, showres, faire weather, corne and fruits of the earth. The second, which is Woodan, that is, stronger, maketh wars and ministreth manly valour against ene∣mies, The third is Frico, bestowing largely upon mortall men, peace and pleasure, whose image they devise and pourtray with a great Ingenti Priapo. viril member. Woodan they engrave armed, like as with us they use to cut and expresse Mars. And they seeme to represent Thor, with the scepter of Iupiter. But these errors, the truth of Christian religion hath at length chased quite away. After that these nations above said, had now gotten sure foo∣ting in the possession of Britain, they divided it into seven kingdomes, and established an Heptarchie: A Monarchie alwaies in the Englishmens Heptarchie. Lib. 2. cap. 5. 96. In which notwithstanding, the prince that had the greatest power, was called, as we read in Beda, King of the English nation: So that in this very Hep∣tarchie it may seeme there was alwaies a Monarchie. After this, Augustine, whom commonly they call the Apostle of the English men, being sent hither by Gregorie the great, Augustine the English∣mens A∣postle. Englishmen converted to the faith. Lib. 2. cap. 1. having abolished these monstrous abominations of heathenish impietie, with most happy successe planting Christ in their hearts, converted them to the Chri∣stian faith. But for what cause and upon what occasion, this Gregorie was so dili∣gent and carefull for the salvation of this English nation, Venerable Beda hath by tra∣dition of his forefathers recounted unto us in these words: The report goeth, that on a certaine day, when upon the comming of merchants lately arrived, great store of wares was brought together into the market place [at Rome] for to be sold, and many chapmen flocked together for to buy, Gregory also himselfe among others came thither, and saw with other things, boies set to sale, for bodies faire and white, of countenance sweet and amiable, ha∣ving the haire also of their head as lovely and beautifull. Whom when he wistly beheld, he demanded, (as they say) from what countrey or land they were brought? Answere was made, that they came out of the Isle of Britaine, the people whereof were as welfavoured to see unto. Then he asked againe, Whether those Ilanders were Christians, or ensnared still with the errours of Paganisme? To which it was said, They were Painims: but he fetching a long deepe sigh from his very heart root; Alas for pitie, quoth he, that the foule fiend and father of darknes should be Lord of so bright and light some faces, and that they who caryed such grace in their countenances should be void of the inward grace in their hearts & soules. Once againe he desired to understand by what name their nation was knowne; They made answer, That they were called Englishmen. Angli: And well may they so be named, quoth he, for An∣gelike faces they have: and meete it is that such should bee fellow-heires with Angels in heaven. But what is the name of that Province from whence these were brought? Answere was returned, that the Inhabitants of the said province were cleped Hol-Deir∣ esse. DEIRI: DEIRI, quoth he, They are in deed De ira eruti, that is delivered from ire and wrath, and called to the mercie of Christ. How call you the King of that province, said he? Answere was given, that his name was Aelle: Then he alluding to the name, said, That Allelu-jah should be sung in those parts, to the praise of God the Creator. Comming therefore to the Bishop of the Ro∣mane and Apostolicall See (for himselfe as yet was not made Bishop) he entreated, that some ministers of the word should be sent unto the English nation, by whose meanes it might be converted to Christ: and even himselfe was ready to under take the performance of this worke, with the helpe of God, incase it would please the Apostolicall Pope, that it should be so. Concerning this conversion, the same Gregorie the Great writeth thus: Behold, Christ. he hath now entred already into the hearts of all nations, in manner, that are: Behold, in one faith he hath conjoined the limits of East and west: Behold, I say, the very British tongue, which could nought else but rudely bray Barbarous words, long since began in the land of God to re∣sound the Hebrew Allelu-jah. And in his Epistle to Augustine himselfe: Who is able heere to shew sufficiently, what great joy is risen up in the hearts of all the faithfull for that the nati∣on of Englishmen by the operation of God almightie his grace, and the labour of your brother∣hood, after the darknes of errours were chased and driven away, is illuminated with the light of holy faith: for that with most sincere devotion they now spurne and tread idols under their feete, who beforetime in superstitîous feare lay prostrate before them? In an old fragment also written in that age, thus we read: Augustine upon one day of Christs Nativitie, which with the universall glorie of the Englishmen is for ever celebrated, did re∣generate by lively Baptisme above ten thousand men, besides an innumerable multitude of women and young children. The River Swale in York-shire. Beda repor∣teth all this of Paulinus Archbishop of York and not of Augustine. But, what a number of Priests, and other holy orders besides, could be sufficient to wash such a sort of people? Having hallowed and blessed therefore the river called in English Swale, the Archbishop (Augustine) commanded by the voice of Cri∣ers & Maisters, that the people should enter the river confidently two by two, and in the name of the Trinitie baptize one another by turnes. Thus were they all borne againe with no lesse miracle, than in times past the people of Israel passed over the (red) Sea divided, and like∣wise Iordan when it turned backe: for even so, they were transported to the banke on the other side: and notwithstanding so deepe a current and chanell, so great and so divers dif∣ferences of sex and age, not one person (who will ever thinke it?) tooke harme. A great miracle no doubt, but this miracle as great as it was a greater preeminence doth surmount: in that, all feeblenesse and infirmitie was laid off in that river: whosoever was sick and defor∣med returned out of it whole and reformed. O festivall spectacle for Angels and men to be∣hold, when so many thousands of a nation suing for grace, came forth of one rivers channel, as out of one mothers wombe, and out of one poole so great a progenie sprung up for the celestiall and heavenly Citie? Hereupon the most gracious Pope Gregorie, with all the companies of Saints above, breaking forth into joy, could not conceale this, but wrote unto Saint Eulogius the Patriarch of Alexandria, that hee would most thankefully congratulate with him, for so great an host baptized upon one Christmas day. No sooner was the name of Christ preached, The Religion of the English∣men. but the English presently with such fervent zeale and devotion consecrated themselves unto Christ, that they tooke in∣credible paines in propagating Christianitie, in celebrating divine service, perfor∣ming all functions and duties of pietie, building Churches and endowing them with rich livings, so that there was not another region in all Christendome that could make reckoning of more monasteries richly endowed: Yea, & divers Kings there were that preferred a religious and monasticall life before their Crowne and Kingdom. So many holy men also this land brought forth, which for their most firme profession of Christian religion, constant perseverance therein, and sincere pietie were canonized Saints, that it gave place to no other Christian province in this behalfe: And like as Britaine was called of that prophane Porphyrie, a plenteous province of Tyrants; so England might truely be named, a most fruitfull Island of Saints. Furthermore, The learning of English∣men. they applied their minds to the bringing in againe of the better kind of arts and sciences, and sowed the seeds of Divinitie and good literature throughout all Germanie, by the meanes of Winifridus, Willebrodus, and others, which a Ger∣man Poet sheweth in these verses: Haec tamen Arctois laus est aeterna Britannis, Quòd post Pannonicis vastatum incursibus orbem, Illa bonas artes & Graiae munera linguae, Stellarum{que} vias, & magni sydera coeli, Observans, iterum turbatis intulit oris. Quin se religio multum debere Britannis, Servata, & latè circùm dispersa fatetur: Quis nomen Winfride tuum, quis munera nescit? Te duce, Germanis pietas se vera, fides{que} Insinuans coepit ritus abolere profanos. Quid non Alcuino facunda Lutetia debes? Instaurare bonas ibi qui foeliciter artes, Barbariem{que} procul, solus depellere coepit. Quid? tibi divinum{que} Bedam, doctissimus olim Dum varias unus bene qui cognoverat artes, Debemus. Yet this immortall praise is due to Britain, Northern Isle, That when the world was overrun and wasted all the while By Pannonik invasions, it did reduce in ure Those troubled countries, with good arts: also with knowledge pure Of Greeke tongue: and observing still the stars in spacious skie, And planets with their wandring waies, taught them Astronomie. For true religion eke preserv'd, and sowne in many a land, The world much bound to Britaine is, and to her helpfull hand. Thy name and gifts, ô Winifride, who knowes not? since by thee The way was made in Germanie; where faith and pietie First setting foote beganne to chase all rites profane away: What ow I not to Alcuine now? may eloquent Paris say, Who happily went there in hand alone to plant a new, Good arts and thence all barbarisme to banish far from view. And unto thee for worthy Bede we are beholden much, The only man for sundry arts, his learned skill was such. Britaine twice Schoole-mistris of France. Peter Ramus saith moreover, that Britaine was twice Schole-mistris to France, meaning, by the Druida and Alcuinus, whose industrie Charles the Great used espe∣cially in erecting the Universitie of Paris. The flitting backe againe of Anglo-Saxons into Germanie. They brought also into Germanie military knowledge of Armes, as well as learning and religion: yea, and, which you will marvell at, if wee may beleeve these words of Eginhardus, they gave unto those Saxons their first Originall, who now inhabite the Dukedome of Saxonie. The nation of the Saxons, saith he, as Antiquities do record, being departed from the English inhabiting Britaine, sailing through the Ocean, part∣ly upon a desire they had, and partly driven of necessitie to seeke where they might seat themselves, arrived upon the coasts of Germanie, and landed at a place called Haduloha: what time as Theodericus King of the Franks warring upon Hirminfridus Duke of the Thuringers his Daughters husband, cruelly with fire and sword wasted their land. Now when as they had in two pight fields already, tried the doubtfull for∣tune of battaile, with lamentable slaughter of their people and uncertaine victorie, Theoderich disappointed of his hope to be Master of the field, dispatched Embassadors unto the Saxons, whose Duke was Hadugato: who having heard the cause of their comming, and taken their promise, that upon obtaining victorie they should cohabite together, led forth an armie with them to aide Theodoricus. By meanes of which forces valiantly fighting now with him, as it were, for their libertie and native country, hee overcame his enemies: and when hee spoiled the naturall Inhabitants, killed them up, and in manner left not one alive, their land according to his promise hee set out and appointed for the Conquerours to possesse, who dividing the same by casting lots, seeing many of them were slaine in the wars, and that by reason of their fewnesse the whole country could not be occupied and peopled by them, part of it, that especially which lyeth Eastward, they made over to coloners and new Inhabi∣tants, to every one according as by lot it fell out, to be holden and tilled for a certaine rent and tribute: All the rest they themselves possessed. On the Southside verily, these Saxons have the Franks, and a remnant of the Thuringers, whom the precedent whirlewind of hostilitie had not touched, and are divided from them by the channell of the river Unstrote: Northward dwell the Normans, a most fierce Nation: East, from them the Obotrites inhabite: and Westward, the Frisians: from whom conti∣nually without intermission they defended their territories and marches thereof, ei∣ther by Covenants of league or necessary skirmishing. But now returne wee to our English-Saxons. For a long time the State and Empire of the Saxons flourished exceeding well un∣der the foresaid Heptarchie, untill those Kingdomes bruised and impaired one of an∣other with civill warres, came all in the end to bee subjest unto the West-Saxons. For, Egbert King of these West-Saxons, having conquered already foure of these Kingdomes, and swallowed up (as it were) in hope the other twaine also, to the end that they which were subdued, and reduced to the rule of one Prince might bee con∣joyned likewise in one name, commanded by an Edict and Proclamation, that the Heptarchie which the Saxons held, England. should bee called , that is, England: whereupon in Latine it was named Anglia, taking denomination of the Angles, as beeing of those three nations most in number, and of greatest prowesse. For they kept in their possession the Kingdome of Northumberland, About the yeare, 800. and Mercia, very great and large countries, together with East-England: whereas the off-spring of the Jutes held Kent only, and the Isle of Wight: The Saxons East-sex, South-sex, & West-sex, a small parcell verily if it be compared with those spatious territories & lands of the English, Of whom, Theod. that is, a Nation. long before this they were generally throughout called English, & in their owne language Englatheod, Anglcynne Engl-cynn, and Englisc-mon: albeit every King∣dome therein, had a speciall name of the owne by it selfe. And this appeareth for certaine, as well out of other writers, as Beda, who intituled his Story, The Historie of the English-Nation. Yea, and in that Heptarchie, those Princes that over-ruled the rest, were stiled Gentis Anglorum Reges, that is, Kings of the English nation: At this time, the name of Britaine, lay forgotten and growne quite out of use among the In∣habitants of this Island: remaining only in books, and not taken up in common speech. And hereupō it is, Epist. to Za∣charie the Pope. that Boniface the bishop of Mentz, descended frō hence, called this our country, Saxony beyond the Sea. Howbeit, K. Eadred, about the yeare of our Lord, 948. used in some Charters and Patents the name and title of King of Great Britaine: like as Edgar in the yeare, 970. bare this stile also, The Monarch of all whole Albion. Being now called Anglia or England, the state and puissance of these Angles was come to the full height, and therefore, (such is the revolution of all mortall things) hastened apace to their period and end. For, the Danes continually infesting our coasts many yeares together, at the length began to enter, ransacking and mangling this countrie most pittifully. NAMES OF ENGLISH-SAXONS. M Y purpose was, even here to have set downe the orderly succession of the English-Saxon Kings, both in the Heptarchie, and also in their Monar∣chie: but seeing that they seeme not properly to belong unto this place, neither is the bare heaping up of names onely delightfull to the Reader, perhaps it will be more acceptable, if I briefly annexe hereto what I have observed by much reading, and especially in Alfricus our ancient Grammarian, as touching the force, Porphyrius de Theolog. Ph . reason, and signification of the ancient English names. Not that my mea∣ning is to interpret every name severally, (for, that were a piece of worke very labo∣rious) neither can such barbarous names, in which there lieth couched great signifi∣cancie, succinct brevitie, and some ambiguitie, be easily delivered in another tongue. But considering that most of them bee compounded, and that of few simples: I will explaine the said simples, that the significations of the compound, implying all the osse and presage of good lucke, wished-for, and happie fortune, may evidently ap∣peare, and that we may throughly perceive, there is among all nations that Orthotes of names, which Plato speaketh of. AEL, Ael. al. &c. EAL, and AL, in names compounded, like as in Greeke compositions, signifieth, Al, or Wholly. Hereupon Aelwin, is as much, as Wholly, or Fully Victor. Albert, All, bright and dread, wholly dread or reverend. Alfred, Altogether Paci∣ficall, or peacefull. Whereunto in some sort are correspondent, in Greeke, Pammachius, Pancratius, Pamphilius, &c. AELF, Vlf. which with varietie of Dialect, is pronounced, Vlf, Wolph, Hulph, Hilp, Helfe, and in these daies Helpe, carrieth in it a signification of Helpe or Aide: as for ex∣ample, Aelfwin, that is, a victorious aide: Aelfwold, a helpfull Governour. Aelfgiva, she that giveth helpe: according to which are these Greeke names, Boetius, Symma∣chus, Epicurus. ARD, Ard▪ betokeneth naturall disposition or towardnesse: as Godard, is as much, as Divine towardlinesse or inclination, Reinard, Sincere disposition, Giffard, a franke and liberall nature: Bernard, a filiall and sonne-like affection. ATHEL, Athel, and E∣thel. Adel, and Ethel import Noble. Thus Aethelred, that is, Noble in counsell; Aethelard, a noble nature or disposition: Aethelbert, famously Noble: Ethelward, a noble Tutor or Protectour. BERT, Bert. the same that with us at this day, Bright, and in Latin, Illustris, and clarus, that is, Splendent, and cleare: so, Ecbert, that is, Bright and shining for ever: Sigbert, a splendent conquerour: as also, shee whom the Germans named, Bertha, the Greeke called Eudoxia, as Luitprandus witnesseth. And of this sort were Phaedrus, Epipha∣nius, Photius, Lampridius, among the Greekes; Fulgentius and Illustrius, &c. among the Latins. Bald. BALD, with the people of the North parts, is the same that Audax in Latine, that is, Bold, as Jornandes sheweth: a word, that yet is not growne out of use. So Baldwin, and by inversion Winbald, is the same, that, Bold Victour: Ethelbald, Nobly bold: Eadbald, Happily bold. Unto which are consonant, Thraseas, Thrasimachus, and Thrasibulus, in Greeke, &c. Ken, and Kin. KEN, and KIN, import, Kinsfolke, as Kinulph, an helpe to Kinsfolke: Kinhelm, a Defender of his kin: Kinburg, a defence to kinred: Kinric, powerfull in or to kins∣folke. Cuth. CVTH, beareth with it a signification of skill and cunning: so, Cuthwin, that is, a skilfull or politicke Conquerour: Cuthred, a learned counsellor: Cuthbert, Notable for his skill: neere unto these sound the Greeke names, Sophocles, Sophianus, &c. Ead. EAD in the compounds, and Eeadig, in simple words, sheweth as much as Happi∣nesse, and Blessednesse. Thus Eadward, is all one with, Happie Saviour, or preserver: Eadulph, Blessed helpe: Eadgar, happie power: Eadwin, Fortunate Conquerour: Of which there is some resemblance, in the Greeke names, Macarius and Eupolemus: in the Latine also, Faustus, Fortunatus, Faelicianus, &c. Fred. FRED, soundeth all one with peace, for, so our ancestours called Sanctuaries, Fredstole, that is, the seats of peace. Thus Frederic, is as much as Powerable, or weal∣thy in peace; Winfred, Victorious peace: Reinfred, Sincere peace. Gisle. GISLE, among the English Saxons betokeneth a pledge or hostage, as Eredgisle, an hostage of peace. Gislebert, a notable or famous pledge: like as in Greeke, Ho∣merus. Hold. HOLD, in the old Glossaries, like as Wold also, is interpreted, Governour, or chiefe Lieutenant: although in other places, it signifieth, LOVE; as Holdlic, Lovely, or Amiable. Helm. HELM, is as much as Defence. Thus, Eadhelm, Happie defence: Sighelm, Victo∣rious defence: Berthelm, Notable, or famous defence: even as these Greeke names, Amyntas, Boetius, &c. Hare, and Here. HARE, and Here, as they are diversly pronounced, betokened both an Armie, and also a Lord: so, Harhold, that is, the Ruler of an Armie: Hareman, A Principall or Chiefe man in an Armie: Herebert, Excellent in an armie: Herwin, a Victorious armie, or Conquerour of an Host: not unlike to those Greeke names, Stratocles, Pole∣marchus, Hegesistratus, &c. Hild. HILD, in Alfricks Grammar is expounded, Lord, and Lady: thus Hildebert, be∣tokeneth a famous or brave Lord: Mathild, a Virgin Ladie: and in the same sense is Wiga found. Wiga. Leod. LEOD, that is to say, People: thus, Leodgar, is one mightie with the people. Leof. LEOF, signifieth, Love: thus, Leofwin, He that winneth love: Leofstan, Most deare or best beloved: like as in Greeke, Agapetus, Erasmus, Erastus, Philo ; and in Latine, Amatus, and Amandus. Mund. MVND, betokeneth, Peace: whereof our Lawyers-terme Mundbreach commeth, that is to say, Breach of peace: so, Eadmund, is Happie peace: Aethelmund, Noble peace: Aelmund, Wholly peaceable, or Make-peace: whereunto are well neere equi∣valent these names, Irenaeus, and Hesychius in Greeke: Lenis, Pacatus, Sedatus, Tranquil∣lus, in Latine. Rad, Red, and Rod. RAN, RAR, and ROD, differing in Dialect, imply, Counsell: as Conrad, Powerfull, or skilfull in counsell. Etheldred, a noble Counsellor. Rodbert, notable for counsell: and in sense not unlike to Eubulus, Thrasibulus, in Greeke. Ric. RIC, signifieth, Potent, Rich, and Valiant, as Fortunatus in these verses hath taught us: Hilperîce potens, si interpres barbarus adsit, Adjutor, fortis, hoc quo{que} nomen habet: O Hilpericke so mightie thou, (stood here th'expounder by Of bar'brous words) an helper strong, eke doth this name imply. Like as Alfric, Al or wholly powerfull: Athelric, Nobly valiant, or mighty. Unto which names these in Greeke allude, Polycrates, Crato, and Plutarch s, Opimius also in Latine. SI , Sig. usually among them, was put for Victorie, whereupon, Sigbert, Renowned or glorious for victorie; Sigward, a victorious Protectour: Sigard, Victorious to∣wardnesse. And to the same sense in manner, Nicocles, Nicomachus, and Nicander with the Greekes: Victor, Victorinus, Vincentius, &c. among the Latines. STAN, Stan. was among those old Forefathers of ours, a termination of the Superla∣tive degree, as, Athelstan, that is, Most noble: Betstan, best: Leefstan, most liefe or deare: Wistan, most wise: Dunstan, most high. WI, Wi. the same that Holy, as Wimund, holy or sacred peace: Wibert, Famous, or re∣nowned for holinesse: Alwi, All holy: like as in Greeke, Hierocles, Hieronymus, Hosius, &c. WILLI, Willi. and Vili, among English Saxons, as Billi at this day, among the Ger∣mans carried a signification of Many: as Willielm, a defender to many: Wildred, Ho∣noured, or reverend of many: Wilfred, Peace to very many. To which in sense and signification accord, Polymacus, Polycrates, Polyphilus, &c. WOLD, Wold. and Wald, betokened with them a Ruler or Governour: Hence commeth Bellewold, An excellent Governour: Ethelwold, a noble Ruler: Herwald, and by inversi∣on, Waldher, the Governour or Ruler of an Armie. But lay a straw here, for in a trifling matter, others as well as my selfe, may thinke these notes sufficient, if not superfluous. But, of greater moment peradventure it will be, if I here commit to writing (if so be these papers be marked to long life) what we have seene: namely, that as Egbert commanded this hither part of Britaine, and which was his owne possession, to bee named England: so now after 800. yeares, or there about, come and gone; even whiles we are perusing this worke, The name of Britaine brought into use againe. King JAMES invested in the Monarchie of the whole Isle, by the propitious favour and grace of God, in the right of his owne inheritance, and with the generall applause of all good men; to the end that this said Isle, which is one entire thing in it selfe, encircled within one compasse of the Ocean; in his owne person, under one Imperiall Crowne, and Diademe, in one communitie of Language, Religion, Lawes, and Judiciall processes; to the increase of perpetuall felicitie, and oblivion of old enmitie, should beare also one name: hath in the second yeare of his raigne by an Edict published and proclaimed through his Realmes, assumed the name, title, and stile of KING OF GREAT BRITAINE, in all matters generally, save only in Writs, and formalities of Law Instruments. THE DANES. W Hat was the beginning of the Danes, the Danes themselves verily know not for certaine. For, the veritie it selfe hath hissed out of the Schoole of Antiquitie, not onely that Giant Danus the sonne of Humblus, but also Goropius (who deriveth it from a Henne. Da-hen. ) Andrew Velleius a Dane and a very great scholler, fetcheth their originall from the Dahae, a peo∣ple of Scythia, and from Marc, a word which should signifie not a limit but a Regi∣on: Our country man Ethelward was fully perswaded, that the name arose from the Citie of Donia. For mine owne part, I alwaies thought, that they sprung from the Danciones, (whom Ptolomee placeth in Scandia, and who by change of one letter, in some copies be named Dauciones ) and from thence voided themselves into the de∣sert and forsaken seat of the English, to wit, into Cimbrica Chersonesus: untill that Jonas Jacobus Venusinus, a most learned man, right judicious, and passing well seene in the studie of Antiquitie, found out by diligent search and inquirie, the very expresse tracts, as it were, and marks of the Danes name, within Sinus Codanus or Codanonia, that is, the Baltish sea, or Oost sea ; where Pomponius Mela made mention in this very tract. Which names pronounced somewhat grossely by the Northerne people, Cadan and Cdononum, Mela forged and fashioned upon the Latine anvill, into Coda∣num and Codanonia: like as the posteritie after him, Gdanum have coined out with a more gentle sound Dansk ; of Clodonaeus, Lodovic, of Cnutus, Canutus. And yet be∣fore the daies of Justinian the Emperour, about the yeare of our redemption 570. the world tooke no knowledge of their name. For then, begun they to rove upon the coasts of France and England, and were by the writers, that penned in Latine the histories of England, Winccinga. named Winccingi, for that they practised Piracie: for Wiccinga, in the Saxon tongue, as Alfricus witnesseth, doth signifie a Pirat that runneth from creek to creeke: also Pagani, that is, Painims, because as yet they were not become Chri∣stians: but the Angles themselves in their language, termed them Deniscan, and of∣ten times Heathon-m n, as one would say, Ethnicks. Of these Danes listen to D . Du∣do of Saint Quintins, an author of good antiquitie, out of the Librarie of John Stow (that most studious Antiquarie of the Citie of London) which was never shut from me. The Danes swarmed from out of Scanza, that is, Scandia, like bees out of an hive, in manifold diuersitie and barbarous manner, after they had in heat, lascivious lust, and wantonnesse engendred an innumerable of-spring. Who after they were growne to ripenesse of yeares falling to hot contention for goods and lands with their fathers, and grand-fathers, yea and often times among themselves; when they once overflowed and grew so populous that they could have no roome sufficient for to inhabite in the place, wherein they presently dwelt: having gathered together by lot a multitude of youth and springals, after a most ancient custome, were thrust out into forraine Realmes, to conquer unto themselves lands by dint of sword, wherein they might live. The Religion of the Danes. Hereupon peradventure we have our Thursday so called. But in the full performance of dicharging those that should be thus sent out, and in muste∣ring up their armies, they sacrificed unto THVR, whom they worshipped in old time as their Lord; for whom they killed not any sheepe, oxen or other cattell, but offered mens bloud: Thinking that to be the most precious Burnt offe∣ring. holocaust and sacrifice of all others, because when the Priest by casting lots had predestinated who should die, they were all at once deadly smitten upon the head with oxe yokes: and when every one that was chosen by lot had his braines dashed out, at one severall stroke, laid along hee was on the ground, and sought out there was with narrow prying the fibre, that is to say, the veine of the heart on the left side, and ha∣ving after their manner drawne out the bloud thereof and stricken it upon the heads of their friends, speedily they hoise up sailes, and thinking that they please their God with such an act, they immediatly put to Sea, and fall to their ores. Moreover, there is another manner, or rather a most foule and detestable superstition, Lib. 1. which the Danes used in pacifying their Gods, and this doth Ditmarus the Bishop, who was of greater antiquitie some∣what than Dudo, in these words describe. But because I have heard strange, and wonder∣full things of the ancient Sacrifices that the Danes and Normans used, I will not over passe the same. There is in these parts a place, and the chiefe it is of this kindome, called Lederum, in a province named Selon: where every ninth yeare in the moneth of Januarie, after the time in which we celebrate the Theophania. Nativitie of our Lord, they all assemble together, and there they kill and sacrifice unto their Gods ninetie and nine men, and as many horses, with dogs and cocks for the hauks, which the Gods sent them, certainly perswading themselves, as I said before, that by the same they should please them. The waste and spoile that the Danes made. About the time of Egbert, in the yeare of Christ, 800. they first landed on our sea-coasts: afterwards with such tumults and hurliburlies as never the like was heard of, having for many yeares made foule havock over all England, razing cities, firing Churches, and wasting countries, they let out the raines loose to all barbarous cru∣eltie, driving, harrying, spoyling, and turning all upside downe where ever they went. Thus after they had killed the Kings of the Mercians & East-Angles, seazed upō their Kingdomes, with a great part of the Kingdome of Northumberland. Then was there a tribute called, Dangelt, imposed upon the poore people, for the repressing of their robberies and outrages: and that you may know what manner of imposition this was, I would have you to reade these few lines copied out of our ancient Lawes: The pai∣ment of Dangelt was at the first ordained for Pirats. For by sore annoying the countrey, they went on, Dangelt. and did what they could to waste it utterly. And verily to keepe downe their insolencie, it was enacted, that Dangelt should yearely be paid, that is, twelve pence out of every hide of land throughout the whole country: for to hire and wage those that might resist and withstand their invasion. Also, of this Dangelt was every Church freed and quit: as also, all lands that were in the proper Or demame. Demesies of those Churches, wheresoever they lay, paying nothing at all in such a contribution as this, because they trusted more in the prayers of the Church, than in their defence by force of armes. But when as now they assaile and set upon Otherwise called, Alu∣red. Aelfred King of the West-Saxons, he one while by retiring and giving them ground, otherwhiles by preassing hard upon them with his victorious forces, not only did put them back from his owne country; but also having slaine a Danish-petty-king of the Mercians, expelled them in manner, quite out of all Mercia: and his sonne Edward the elder following in traine of his fa∣thers victories, when he had put the Danes to flight, brought East England to his sub∣jection: like as Adelstane his base sonne, speedily marching to atchieve victories, with great slaughter of the Danes subdued Northumberland, and so terribly pursued the Danes, that they were forced either to depart the realme, or to submit themselves unto him. By the valorous prowesse of these Princes, England recovered out of the whirlepit of calamities, and rested from that bloody warre by the space of 50. yeares. But while Etheldred a man of a dull and soft spirit raigned, the Danes taking advan∣tage of his cowardise, strooke up alarme and sounded the battaile againe: and having wasted the country, 1012. constrained the Englishmen to redeeme their peace yearely with a great sum of monie: and so insolently they bare themselves, that the Englishmen conspired generally together, and in one night murdred all the Danes every mothers sonne of them throughout all England, thinking by the effusion of bloud to quench the fire of Danish warre, which brake out neverthelesse into a more pernicious flame. For, Cut in his coines. Sueno King of the Danes, provoked with this slaughter of his people, invaded England with a puissant armie, and having in a furious and enraged mood made much spoile, he put Etheldred to flight, subdued the whole Kingdome, and left the same un∣to his sonne Canutus: who having encountred in many cruell and sharpe battailes, and those with variable fortune fought, The Danes afflicted Eng∣land 200. yeares, and reigne about 20. with Etheldred now returned, and his sonne Edmund surnamed Iron-side, had two of his sonnes succeeded after him, to wit, Ha∣rald a bastard, and Hardy-Knout. Edward the Confessor. Canutus the Hardie: After they were dead, and the Danish yoke shaken off, the Kingdome fell againe unto the English. For, Edward, who in regard of his holinesse was surnamed, The Confessor, the sonne of Etheldred by his second wife, recovered the Crowne and royall Dignitie. Now began England to take breath againe: but soone after, as saith the Poet, —Mores rebus cessêre secundis, Prosperitie perverted manners. The Priests were idle, drowsie, and unlearned, the people given to riot and loose life: they grew also through rest to be lither, discipline lay, as it were, dead, the com∣monwealth sick, as one would say, of an infinite sort of vices, lay in consumption and pined away: but pride above all, whose waiting maid is destruction, was come to a mightie head. And as Gervasius Of Canter∣bury. Dorobornensis, of that time speaketh They fell so fast to commit wickednesse, that to be ignorant of any sinfull crimes, was held to be a crime. All which most evidently foreshewed destruction. The Englishmen of those times, as William of Malmesburie writeth, went lightly appointed with their garments, reaching but to the mid knee, their heads shorne, their beards shaven, but the upper lip uncut, where the mustaches grew continually, wearing massie bracelets of gold about their armes, carrying markes upon their skin: pounced in, of sundry colours: The Clergie contenting themselves, with triviall literature, could scarsly back and hew out the words of the Sacrament. THE NORMANS. L Ike as in ancient times out of that East coast of Germanie (in respect of us) which tendeth Northward, the Franks first, and then the Saxons, grie∣vously annoied both France, Gaule, and Britaine, with their depredati∣ons, so that in the end, the one became Lords of Britaine, the other of France: even so in these later daies ensuing, the Danes first, and afterward the Normans succeeding in their place, from out of the same coast did the like. As if it were fatally given unto that tract, by the dispose and providence of Almightie God, to conceive still, and often times to send out of her wombe, nations to afflict France, and Britaine, yea, and to establish new Kingdomes therein. Nordmanni. Nord-l udi. Hel ldus. These Normans were so called of the Northerne quarter or climate from whence they came for, Normans be nothing else but Men of the North: in which sense also they are named Nordleudi, that is, a Northerne people (for, a mixt nation they were of the most valiant Norvegians, Suedens, and Danes.) In the time of Charles the Great, they practised roving and piracie, in such cruell manner about Frisia, Belgia, England, Ire∣land, and France, that when the said Charles the Great saw their roving ships in the Mediterranean sea, he shed teares abundantly, and with a grievous deepe sigh said: Heavie I am at the heart that in my life time they durst once come upon this coast: The booke of Sangall concerning the Acts of Charles the Great. and I fore∣see what mischiefe they will worke hereafter to my posteritie: Yea, and in the publique Processions, and Letanies of Churches, this afterwards was added to the rest: From the race of Normans, Good Lord deliver us. They drave the French to that extre∣mitie, that King Charles the Calvus. Bald, was forced to give unto Hasting a Norman Arch∣pirate, the Earledome of Charters for to asswage the mans furie: King Charles the Crassus. Grosse, granted unto Godfrey the Norman a part of Normandy. Neustria, with his daughter also in marriage. But afterwards, by force, and armes they seated themselves neere un∣to the mouth of the river Sein, in a country which before time was corruptly called Neustria, Neustria. because it had beene a parcell of Westrasia: For, so the writers of the mid∣dle time named that which the Germans used to call Westen-rijch, that is, the West-kingdome: and doth comprise all that lieth betweene the rivers of Loyre, and Seine: Which tooke the name of Normandie afterwards of them, as it were the region of Northerne men, when King Charles the simple had confirmed it unto their Prince Rou. Rollo, whose Godfather he was at his Baptisme, to bee held in Fee by homage, and withall bestowed upon him his daughter in marriage. At which time, as we reade in an old Manuscript belonging to the Monasterie of Angiers, Charles, surnamed The Foole. Stultus, gave Normandie to Rollo, and his daughter Gista with it: This Rollo daigned not to kisse the foote of Charles, and when his friends a∣bout him admonished him to kisse the Kings foote as his homager, for the receit of so great a benefit, hee answered in the English tongue, Ne se by God, which they interpret thus, NO BY GOD: Bigod. The King then and his Courtiers deriding him, and corruptly repeating his speech, called him Bigod, whereupon the Normans be at this day called Bigodi. Hence also peradventure it is, that the Frenchmen even still use to call hypocrites, and supersti∣tious folke, Bigod. This Rollo, who being baptised received therewith the name of Robert, some writers report to have become a Christian but in shew and colour onely; others, upon good deliberation and in earnest: and they adde moreover, that hee was warned so to doe by God in a dreame: which I pray you give me leave, (being a man for all this, that doateth not upon dreames) to relate without suspicion of vanitie, from the cre∣dit of writers in those daies. The report goeth, that as he sailed, he dreamed he saw himselfe fouly infected with the leprosie, but when hee was washed once in a most cleare spring at the foot of an high hill, hee recovered, and was cleansed thereof, and anon climbed up to the top of the said hill. This Dreame when he reported, a Christi∣an that was a captive in the same ship with him, interpreted it in this wise: The Le∣prosie was the impious worship of Idol gods, wherewith he was tainted; that the spring, betokned the holy Baptisme. Laver of Regeneration, wherewith being once cleansed, he should ascend up the hill, that is, attaine unto high honor, and heaven it selfe. This Rollo begat William surnamed Longa spata. Long-espee, Dukes of Normandie. of the long sword which he used to weare: and William begat Richard, the first of that name. Whose sonne, and ne∣phew by his son carrying both his name, succeeded after him in the Duchie of Nor∣mandie: but when Richard the third was dead without issue, his brother Robert was Duke in his stead, who of his concubine begat that William, whom wee com∣monly name The Conquerour, and the Bastard. All these were every one for their no∣ble acts, atchieved both at home and abroad, most renowned Princes. Now whiles this William being of ripe yeares, ruled Normandie, Edward the holy, surnamed CONFESSOR, King of England, and the last of the Saxons line, departed out of this world unto his heavenly country, to the great misse and losse of his people, who be∣ing the sonne of Ladie Emma cosen to William, and daughter to Richard, the first of that name, Duke of Normandie, whiles hee remained in Normandie banished, had promised unto him, Domu re∣gia Major. that he should succeed after him in the Crowne of England. But Harold the sonne of Godwin, and Great Master or Steward of King Edwards house, usurped the Kingdome: whom to dispossesse, his brother Or Tostre. Tosto of one side, and the Normans of the other, did what they could, and left no stone unturned: But when he in a pitched field had, neere unto Stamford-bridg in Yorkshire, slaine his bro∣ther Tosto and Harold King of Norway, whom Tosto had drawn to take part with him in this war, Normans. 10 6. and so obtained a bloudy victorie, behold, within nine daies after the said WILLIAM surnamed the Bastard, Duke of Normandie, taking hold of the promises of King Edward late deceased, and presuming of his adoption and neere alliance, ha∣ving levied a great armie, arrived in England among the South-Saxons. Against whom Harold forthwith advanced, albeit his souldiers were sore wearied, and his power by the former battaile much empaired. And not farre from Hastings they en∣counter and joyne battaile: where Harold engaging himselfe into the midst of the medley, and fighting manfully lost his life with a great number of Englishmen left slaine in the place: but how many they were just, hard it is exactly to conceive and faithfully to put downe. WILLIAM thus a Conquerour presently with banner dis∣plaid marched about in order of battaile by Wallingford to London: where being received, The Charter of William Conquerour. he was solemnly inaugurated King, as unto whom, by his owne saying, The Kingdome was by Gods providence appointed, and by vertue of a gift from his Lord and Cosen King Edward the Glorious, granted : and after some few lines the story runneth on and saith, that the most beauteous King Edward had by adoption ordained him his heire in the Kingdome of England. The Histo∣rie of Saint Stephens Abbey at Cane in Normandie. And if we list to believe the Historie of Saint Stephens in Caen of Normandie, at his last breath he uttered these words: The Re∣gall Diadem which none of all my predecessours ever wore, I got and gained by the grace of God only, and no right of inheritance. And a little after: I ordaine no man heire of the King∣dome of England, but I commend the same to the eternall Creator, whose I am, and in whose hands are all things. For I became not possessed of so great honour by any hereditary right, but by a terrible conflict, and with much effusion of bloud I tooke it from that perjured King Harold, and after I had either slaine or put to flight his favourers, and adherents, I subdued it under my Dominion. But why doe I so briefly run over this so great alteration of the English state? Have therefore, if you thinke not much to read it, what my selfe with no curious pen, (haply with as little studie and premeditation, howbeit according to the truth of the Historie) wrote, when being but young, not well advised nor of sufficiencie to undergoe so great a burthen, I purposed to set forth our Historie in the Latine tongue. VVHen Edward the Confessour was now without issue departed this life, The Nor∣mans con∣quest. the Nobles and people of the land were in doubtfull care distracted about the setting up of a new King in his place. Edgar, surnamed Aetheling, King Edmund Iron side his nephewes nephew by a sonne onely of all the issue male of the Saxons line remained alive, unto whom by right of inheritance the kingdome was due. But considering he was thought by reason of his tender yeares, not meete to mannage the State, and had beside intermingled his naturall disposition with forrain manners, as being borne in Hungarie. Pannonia, and the sonne of Agathra daughter to the Emperor Henrie the third, who was in so remote a countrie farther off, than that he could conveniently assist the young Gentleman either with aid or counsell: in these regards hee was lesse affected of the Englishmen, who desired nothing more than to have a King, (as it were) out of their owne bodie: And therefore, all of them for the most part had their eies fixed with much respect upon Harold Goodwins sonne, a man for his good parts as well in warre as peace very glorious. For albeit he was of noble parentage but by one side: and his father for his treacherie and treason, as also for pilling and polling had incurred everlasting infa∣mie and shame, yet with his courteous affabilitie, gentill deportment, liberalitie, and warlike prowesse he wound himselfe into exceeding great especiall favour with the people. For, there could not another bee set by him, in whom there was more resolute hardinesse to ad∣venture upon danger, or more advised policie in the midst of dangers. His valour also and fortitude shined out so apparantly in the Welsh warres, which heretofore most happily hee had brought to an end, that he was reputed verily a man passing well furnished with all vertues required in a soveraigne Commander, and even borne to repaire the decaied state of England. Moreover, good hope there was that the Danes (who onely terrified this country) would bee the better contented and pleased with him, because he was the son of Githa, daughter to Sue∣no King of Denmarke. And in case there should arise any other power against him, either forraine or domesticall, he was thought sufficiently enabled to make his part good, with the af∣fectionate hearts of the common people, with the alliance also and affinitie that hee had among the Nobility. For hee had to wife, the sister of Morcar and Edwin two brethren, men of ex∣ceeding great puissance: and Edric surnamed the Wild, a man of high spirit, and in chiefe au∣thoritie was linked to him in the neerest bond of Affinitie: besides it fell out very well for him, that at one and the selfe-same time, Sueno King of the Danes had his hands full of warre with Sueden; and betweene William Duke of Normandy, and Philip the French King, there fell some dislikes and emulation, for that Edward the Confessor during his exile in Nor∣mandie, had in expresse termes promised unto William of Normandie the Kingdome, if hee died without issue: For the performance of which promise, Harold became as it were, surety, and bound himselfe with an oath, (what time hee was detained prisoner in Norman∣die) but with this condition annexed, that he might espouse the daughter of the said William of Normandie. Whereupon most men thought it the wisest policy to set the Crowne upon William his head; to the end that by performing oath, and promise, the warre that they foresaw now threatned, and destruction (which alwaies waiteth as a due punishment upon perjurie) might be averted, and withall by laying Normandie to England, the Kingdome under so mightie a Prince might be surely established, and the common-wealth very much ad∣vanced. But Harold quickly preventing all consultations whatsoever; thinking it not good for him to linger and delay any whit: that very day on which King Edward was enterred, contrary to the expectation of most men, entred upon the soveraigne government, and with the applause onely of such as were then present about him, who with acclamations saluted him King, without the due complements and solemnitie of Coronation, set the Imperiall Diadem upon his owne head. By which act of his, as being a breach of ancient ordinance, he exceedingly provoked and stirred up against him, the whole Clergie and Ecclesiasticall state. But he knowing well enough, how hard it was for a new Prince, and an usurper, to main∣taine his royall place and dignitie, without an opinion of pietie and vertue, for to blot out that his offence given, and to establish his Scepter, did all he possibly could for the promoting of religion, and preferment of Churchmen, and to beautifie and adorne Monasteries and religi∣ous houses: Edgar Aetheling Earle of Oxford, and all the nobles he entertained with all love and favour: the people he eased of theire tributes: he gave bountifully a great largesse of mony to poore people: and in one word, with faire speech and affable language, with mild hearing of causes, and equitie in deciding the same, he wonn to himselfe singular love, and no lesse au∣thoritie and reputation. So soone as William Duke of Normandie was truly advertised of these newes, he seemed to take the death of King Edward very heavily, whiles in the meane time, he was vexed at the heart that England which hee had in conceit and hope already swal∣lowed and devoured, was thus caught away out of his very chawes. Forthwith therefore, by advice of his counsell and friends, he dispatcheth Embassadors to Harold, with instructions to put him in mind of the promises and stipulation past; but withall, in his name to make claime to the Crowne. Harold, after some pause and deliberation upon the point, returneth this answer: As touching the promises of King Edward, William was to understand, that the Realme of England could not be given by promise, neither ought he to bee tied unto the said promise, seeing the kingdome was fallen unto him by election and not by right of Inheritance. And as for his owne stipulation, extorted and wrung it was from him, then a prisoner, by force and by guile, in feare of perpetuall imprisonment, to the hinderance of the English common-wealth and prejudice of the State, and therefore void: which neither ought hee, if he could, nor might if he would, make good, since it was done without the Kings privitie and consent of the people. And a very hard and unreasonable demand it was of his, that hee should renounce and surrender unto a Norman Prince, a meere stranger and of forrein linage, that kingdome wherein hee was invested with so great assent of all sorts. With this answere William was not well pleased, and he thought that Harold thereby sought starting holes for to hide his perjurie. Others therefore he sent out of hand in Embassage about the same mat∣ter, who should admonish him, how religiously hee had bound himselfe by oath, and that for∣sworne persons should be sure of finall perdition at Gods hands, and reproachfull shame among men. But when as now the daughter of William affianced unto Harold in the covenant, (the very strength and knot of the foresaid stipulation) was by Gods appoinment taken away by death, the Embassadours were with lesse courtesie entertained, and received none other an∣swere than before. So that now by this time, there was nothing like to follow but open warre. Harold riggeth and prepareth his navie, m sters and presseth souldiers and placeth strong gar∣risons along the sea coasts in convenient places, and provideth all things in readinesse which were thought needefull and meet for to beat backe the Normans forces: Howbeit, the first tempest of warre, beside the expectation of all men, arose from Tosto the brother in whole bloud of Harold. He being a man of a proud, hautie and fell heart, ruled in great authori∣ty a good while over Northumberland, but growing outragious in cruelty to his inferiors, in pride towards his Soveraigne, and in hatred to his brethren, was outlawed by Edward the Confessor, and so withdrew himselfe into France, and now, by the advice of Baldwine Earle of Flanders, and perswasion of William Duke of Normandie, as it seemeth probable, (For Tosto and William married two daughters of Baldwine Earle of Flanders) beginneth to trouble his brother with open warre, whom a long time he deadly hated. From Flanders hee tooke sea with a fleet of 60. rovers-ships, wasteth the Isle of Wight, and annoyeth the sea-coast of Kent: but terrified at the comming of the Kings navie, hee set up saile and directing his course toward the more remote parts of England, landeth in Lincolneshire, and there har∣rieth the Countrey: where Edwin and Morcar give him battell: but beeing discomfited and put to flight, into Scotland hee goes, from thence to renew his forces and so to warre afresh. Now were all mens minds held in suspense with the expectation of a twofold warre, of the one side out of Scotland, of the other out of Normandie: and so much the more be∣cause at the feast of Easter, A Comet. there was seene about a sevennight together a blazing starre of an hideous and fearefull forme, which turned mens minds already troubled and perplex∣ed, (as it falleth out in a turbulent time) to the forefeeling of some unluckie events. But Harold carried an heedfull eie to all parts of his kingdome, and the south coast hee fortified with garrisons. Malcolm. Lesse feare hee had from Scotland and Tosto, because Mil. Ca∣lumbus. Malcolme King of the Scots was more disquieted with civill dissensions. Meane while, William much busted in his mind about England, casting about what course to take, ever and anon communicated with his Captaines about the point; whom hee saw cheerefull, and full of forward hopes: But, all the difficulty was how to make money, for defraying the charges of so great a warre. For, when in a publike assembly of all the states of Normandie, it was propounded as touching a subsidie, answere was made, That in the former warre against the French, their wealth was so much empaired, that if a new warre should come upon them, they were hardly able to hold and defend their owne: That they were to looke rather unto the defence of their proper possessions, than to invade the territories of others: and this warre intended, just though it were, yet seemed it not so necessary, but exceeding dangerous: beside, the Nor∣mans were not by their allegeance bound to military service in forain parts. Neither could they by any meanes be brought to grant a levie of money, Filius Osberni. although William Fitzosbern, a man in high favour with the Duke and as gracious among the people, endeavoured what he could to effect it: yea, and to drawe others by his owne example, promised to set out fortie tall ships of his owne proper charges towards this warre. Duke William then, seeing he could not bring this about in a publike meeting, goeth another way to worke. The wealthiest men that were he sendeth for, severally one by one to repaire unto him: he speaks them faire, and requireth them to contribute somewhat toward this warre. They then, as if they had strived avie who should helpe their Prince most, promise largely: and when that which they pro∣mised was presently registred in a booke, there was a huge masse of money quickly raised, and more than men would ever have thought. These matters thus dispatched, he craveth aid and helpe of the Princes his neighbours, to wit, the Earles of Andium. Anjou, Pictonum. Poictou, Cenomanno∣rum. Maine and Bononiae. Bulloigne, and unto them he promiseth faire Lands and possessions in England. Philip also the French King he goeth unto, and solliciteth: voluntarily promising in case he aided him, to become his vassall and leege man, and for England to take the oath of fealtie unto him. But it being thought nothing good for the state of France, that the Duke of Norman∣die, who already was not so pliable and obedient to the French King as he ought, should bee bettered in his state by the addition of England (for, the power of neighbour potentates is alwaies suspected of Princes) so far was the King from yeelding any helpe, that he disswa∣ded him rather from invading England. But by no meanes could the Duke be reclaimed from his enterprise, nay much more encouraged he was now and set on, being once backed with warrant from Alexander the Bishop of Rome (for even now began the Pope to usurpe authority over Princes:) who allowing of his cause and quarrell, had sent unto him a sacred and hallowed banner as a luckie fore-token of gaining both the victory, and Kingdome: yea and with all cursed whosoever should oppose themselves against him. He assembled therefore all the forces he could possibly raise, and gathered together a mighty navie before the Towne of Saint Valeries, which standeth upon the mouth of the river Some, where he lay a long time windbound: For the procurement whereof with many a vow he importuned Saint Valeric the patron-Saint of the Towne, and heaped upon him a number of gifts and ob∣lations. Harold, who with his forces had waited very long in vaine for his comming de∣termined to dissolve his armie, to withdraw his navie, and to leave the sea-coast: both for that he was compelled thereto for want of provision, as also because the Earle of Flanders had written unto him, that William would not stirre that yeere: whom he soone beleeved, as thinking that the time of the yeere was such as had locked up the seas and barred all naviga∣tion, forasmuch as the [autumnall] When daies and nights be of a length: a∣bout the eleventh day of September. Aequinox was neere: Whiles he thus deviseth with him∣selfe, driven he was (upon an unexpected necessity of new warre) to call backe his armie; for, Harold surnamed the Durus. Hard and Harfager, king of Norway, who had practised piracie in the North parts of Britaine, and already subdued the Isles of Orknes, being by Tosto sol∣licited and called forth in hope of the Kingdome of England, arrived within the mouth of the river Tine with a fleet of 500. flibotes or thereabout, where Tosto also came and joined his owne fleet. When they had a good while forraged and spoiled the countrey heere, they weighed anchor, and sailing along the coast of Yorkshire, put into Humbre, and there began to commit outrages with all manner of hostility. For the repressing of whom, the two Earles Edwin and Morcar led forth a power of soldiers, whom they had raised suddainly and in tumultuary haste: but they not able to abide the violent charge of the Norwegians, fled for the most part as fast as they could, and together with the Earles made shift to escape: howbe∣it, many of them passing over the river Ouse, were swallowed up with the waves thereof. The Norwegian hen, goe in hand to lay siege unto the Citie of Yorke, which straight waies they get by surrender, hostages being given on both sides. But after some few dayes, King Harold having gathered his whole power from all parts together, speedeth him to Yorke, and from thence marcheth against the Norwegians, who lay encamped strongly in a most safe place: for backed they were with the Ocean, flanked on the left hand with Humber, wherein their fleet rid at anchor, and had for their defence on the right side and afront, the river Derwent. Howbeit King Harold couragiously setteth upon them: where first, there was a cruell conflict at the Bridge, standing over the river Darwent, which one Norwegi∣an souldier, Stanford bridge neere Yorke. by report, made good for a time against the whole armie of the Englishmen, and held out so long untill he was shot through with a dart, and died: after this continued the bat∣tell a good while within the very campe, fought with equall valour, and indifferent for∣tune on both sides: But in the end, the Norwegians were disarraied and scattered, and in the midst of the battell Harold himselfe King of the Norwegians, and Tosto, with the greater part of the Armie lost their lives. Vpon this Victorie, there fell unto King Harold an ex∣ceeding rich bootie, a great masse both of gold and silver, and that huge Armado, except twentie small Barques onely, which he granted unto Paul Earle of Orkney and O∣lave the Sonne of Harold who was slaine, for to carry away those that were hurt, taking their oath first, that from thence forward they should not attempt any hostilitie agaist England. This happie victorie encourged Harold and set him aloft: now, he thought that he should bee a terrour, yea, to the Normans, howsoever hee grew odious unto his owne people, because hee had not divided the spoile among his souldiers. Howbeit, wholly hee employed himselfe to reforme the disordered state of the countrey, which in this part was pittifully out of frame and lay neglected. Meane while, Willam Duke of Normandie, finding a fit season for his purpose, about the end of September weighed anchor and launched forth: then with a gen∣tle gale of winde, he sailed with all his shipping, and arrived at Pevensey in Sussex, where being landed upon the naked shore, for to cut off all hope of return from his men, he did set fire on his ships: and having erected a fortresse there, for his men to retire thither in safetie, for∣ward he marcheth to Hastings, where also he raised another strong hold, and placed therein a garrison. Now by this time, he maketh proclamation, declaring the causes of this warre: namely, to revenge the death of Alfred his Cousin, whom together with many Normans Godwin the Father of Harold had murthered: Item, to bee avenged of the wrongs that Ha∣rold had done, who when he had banished Robert Archbishop of Canterburie, even then by intrusion entred upon the Kingdome of England now pertaining to him, (treading under foot the religious respect of his oath.) Howbeit, by an Edict he straightly charged his souldi∣ers not in hostile manner to spoile the English men. Newes hereof in all hast was brought to King Harold, who by all meanes thinking it good to use prevention, and as spedily as might be to encounter the Duke, sendeth out his messengers every way, calleth earnestly upon his subjects to continue in their faithfull allegiance, assembleth all his forces in every place, and with great journies hasteneth to London: where there presented himselfe unto him an Em∣bassadour from Duke William; but as he made many words in claiming the Kingdom, Harold in a furious fit of anger and indignation, went within a little of laying violent hands upon the very person of the Embassadour. For a hard matter it was to bereave a fresh Victour of his pride and confident hope. Forthwith he dispatched his Embassadours also unto Willi∣am, by way of insolent termes to menace him, unlesse with all speed he retired backe into Nor∣mandie. Yet William gave him a gentle answer, and dismissed them with great courtesie. Meane time, Harold mustreth up souldiers in London, and findeth that by the former bat∣tell against the Norwegians, his forces were very much diminished: yet a mightie armie hee levied of Nobles, Gentlemen, and others, whom the love of their native countrey had rai∣sed and brought into the field, for to put backe & repell the common danger. Presently he lea∣deth forth into Southsex, notwithstanding his mother (though in vaine) did what she could to stay him: and with an undaunted heart, encamping upon a faire plaine, scarce seven miles from Duke William, sat him downe. And thither also immediately the Norman approached with his Armie. First there were secretly sent out on both sides Espies: and they of the English part, ei∣ther not knowing the truth, or disposed to lie, made incredible report of the Normans number, their furniture and provisiō, of their good order also and discipline, insomuch as Gyth, a youn∣ger brother of King Harold, a man renowned for martiall exploits, thinking it no good policy to hazard all in the triall of one battel, advertised the King, that the events of war were doubt∣ful, that victories oftener depend of fortune than of valour, & that holding off, and deliberate delay, was the chiefest point of militarie discipline: Also, he advised him, that in case he had made promise unto William of the Kingdom, he should for his owne person withdraw himself: for, surely he could not with all his forces be fenced against his conscience, and God no doubt, would require punishment for breach of faith & promise: neither, saith he, wil any thing strike greater terrour into the Normans, than if he should be levying and enrolling of a new Armie, whereby they might bee received eftsoones with fresh battels. Furthermore, he assureth him in his owne behalfe, that if he would commit the fortune of that battell into his hands, hee would not faile to performe the part of a good brother, and a valiant Captaine: as who trusting upon the clearenesse of his heart, and a good conscience, might either more easily defeat his enemies, or else more happily spend his life for his country. The King was not well content, to heare these admonitions and counsels which seemed to tend unto his dishonour: for, as he could willingly abide the event and issue of warre, so in no wise could he endure the reproach of fearefull cow∣ardise, And therfore, the praises of the Normans with bad words he depraved, neither thought he that it would stand with his owne dignitie, or the reputation of his former prowesse, being now come as it were to the utmost point of perill and hazard, like a milke-sop and dastard, to draw foot backe, and incurre the perpetuall staine and blot of shame. Thus, whom it pleaseth Almightie God to overthrow, hee first maketh them uncapable of good counsell. Whiles these matters thus passed between them, Duke William upon a pious affection to preserve & main∣taine the state of Christendome, and to spare the effusion of Christian bloud, sendeth a Monke as a mediatour between both, who proposed this offer & condition unto Harold, Either wholly to resigne up his Kingdom, or to acknowledge from thence forth, that he holdeth it of the Nor∣man Duke as his superiour Lord, or else to decide the quarrell with William by combate, or at leastwise stand to the judgment of the Pope of Rome, touching the Kingdom of England. But he as one having no rule of himselfe, and accepting of no condition whatsoever, referred the whole triall of the matter to the tribunall seat of God, & made answer, that the very next day following, which was the second 14. Octob. before the Ides of October; he would bid him battell: and this day upon a credulous errour, he had assured himselfe would be fortunate unto him, because it was his birth day. All the night ensuing, the Englishmen spent in licentious revels, in rio∣tous excesse of banqueting, and in clamorous noises: But the Normans bestowed the same in praiers and vows for the safetie of the armie, and for victorie. The next morning by day light they embattell thēselves on both sides: Harold placed in the vant-guard, the Kentish men with their billes Or heavie Axes. and halberts, (for by an old custome the front of the battell was due to them:) and in the rereguard himselfe took place with his brother, and those of middle England with the Londoners. Of the Normans vaward Roger of Montgomerie, and William Fitz-osberne had the leading: the same consisted of horsemen out of Anjou, Perch, and little Britaine, the most part of whom served under Fergentus the Briton. The maine battell which stood of Poi∣ctovins & Germans, Geffery Mattell, and a German Pensioner commanded. In the rereguard was the Duke himselfe with the whole manhood of Normans, and the flower of his Nobilitie and Gentrie. But in every place, were intermingled with the rest certaine companies of Ar∣chers. The Normans having with no confused nor untunable shout, sounded the battell, and ad∣vanced forward with their Battalions, & at the first encounter did let flie lustily on every side a volley of arrowes like haile, a kind of fight, which as it was strange to the Englishmen, so it terrified thē exceedingly for, they flew so thick, that they thought they had their enemies even in the midst of thēselves. Then with a violent charge, they assaile the vaward of the English: and they for their parts, who resolutely had determined to cover the place which they had ta∣ken up with their bodies, rather than to give one foot of ground, bending all their forces, and keeping themselves close together right valiantly put the enemies backe, and slew a number of them: the Normans reenforced themselves againe upon them, and with an horrible noise, the battels of both sides gave the strok: And now by this time were they come to the medley, wherin as if foot to foot, & man to man, they had coped together, there was for a good while a fierce & cruel fight: The Englishmen standing thick & close, as if they had stuck one to another, abid the brunt & charge of the enemies with constant resolution, insomuch as after many a bloudy wound received, they were now at the point to have reculed, had not William performing the part of a leader, as well as of a souldier, with his authoritie restrained them. Thus the fight con∣tinuing still, the Norman horsemen brake in upon them, and withall from above, the arrowes flew so thick about the English mens eares, that they were in manner overwhelmed with them: yet for all that, they kept their array unbroken. For, Harold neglecting no dutie of a valorous Captaine, was ready in person every where: and William againe for his part bare himselfe as worthily, who having one or two horses stabbed and slaine under him, seeing that he could not by fine force, and true valour indeed get the upperhand, betooke himselfe to stratagems: com∣manding his men to sound the retreat, and keeping them still in good order and array, to give ground and retire. The English men supposing now, that they turned backe and fled, and that themselves had the victorie in their hands, display their ranks, and being thus disraied, presse hard upō their enemies, as making full account that the day was now sure enough theirs. Wher∣as the Normans casting themselves suddenly againe into array, and winding about, charge the English afresh, and thus setting upon them being scattered, and out of order, enclosed them round about, and made an exceeding great slaughter of them. Many of them whiles they stood doubtfull, whether to fight or to flie, were borne downe and slaine: but more of them having re∣covered an higher ground, casting themselves round into a ring, and comforted with the ex∣hortation one of another, with good resolution, turned head and resisted a long time, as if they had made choice of that place for an honorable death: until that Harold being shot through the head with an arrow, together with his two brethren, Gyth & Leofwin, lost his life. Then Edwin and Morcar with some others that remained alive, and escaped by flight, yielded to the hand of God, and gave place unto the time, considering that the battell had continued without inter∣mission from seven of the clock in the morning unto the evening twilight. There were in this battell missed of Normans much about 6000. but of English many more by far. William now Conqueror, rejoyced exceedingly, & by way of a solemne supplication or procession, which he ap∣pointed, gave all honor to the Almightie and most gratious God: and when he had erected his pavilion in the midst of the bodies lying slain by heapes, there he passed that night. The morrow after, when he had buried his owne men, & granted leave unto the English men to do the like, himselfe returned to Hastings partly to consult about following the traine of his victorie, and in part to refresh awhile his wearied souldiers. No sooner was the newes of this grievous over∣throw by fearfull Messengers brought to London, and to other cities of England, but the whole land generally was striken into dumps, and as it were astonied. Githa the Kings mother, like a woman gave her selfe to plaints and lamentations, so, as that she would admit no consolation, but with most humble praiers intreated the Conquerour, for the dead bodies of her sonnes. And those she enterreth in the Abbey of Waltham. Edwin sendeth Queen Algitha his sister into the farther parts of the Kingdome: But the Lords and Peeres of the Realme, will the people not to cast downe their hearts, but lay their heads together about the State and Common wealth. The Archbishop of Yorke, the Citizens of London, and the Sea souldiers, whom they called , gave their advice to consecrate Edgar King, and to begin warre againe with William: Botesca les. Edwin and Morcar plotted secretly to usurpe the Imperiall rule and dignitie for themselves: but the Bishops, Prelates, and others, who were terrified with the flashing thunderbolts of the Popes curse, thought best to yield, and not by doubtfull battell to provoke the Conquerours heavie indignation against them: nor to strive against God, who now for the sinnes of the people calling for vengeance, had delivered England, as it w re into the hands of the Norman. William all this while fortifying the Towne of Ha∣stings, purposed to march directly with his armie in warlike manner to London: but because he would raise the greater terrour abroad, and make all sure behinde, having divided his forces, he rangeth over part of Kent, over Southsex, Suthrey, Southampton shire, and Berk shire, fireth villages, and upland houses, driveth booties, at Wallangford hee passeth over the Thames, and terrifieth all the countrey as hee goeth. Yet for all this, the Nobles and Peeres wist not what counsell or course to take, neither could they be brought, to lay downe private grudges, and enmities, and with one heart to consult in common for the good of the State. The Prelates, to be absolved from curses of the Church, and censures of the Bishop of Rome, (whereby he now exercised his authoritie, not only over mens soules, but also over Kingdomes) seeing that the state of the Realme was now not decaied, but quite ruinate and past recoverie, persisted in this mind to submit, in so much as many seeking to save them∣selves, secretly departed out of the Citie. But Alfred Archbishop of Yorke, Wolstan Bi∣shop of Worcester, and other Prelates, together with Eadgar Aetheling, Edwin and Morcar, at Berkhamsted doe meete the Norman Conquerour, (who made them many and large pro∣mises:) and having given hostages, committed themselves to his protection, and submitted. Then forthwith speedeth he to London, where being received with great and joyfull acclama∣tions, he was saluted King: for the solemnizing of his Coronation, which he appointed should be on Christmas day, he made all the preparation that might bee, and meane while bent his whole mind, and all his thoughts to the setling of the State. Now was the period and revolution of the English-Saxons Empire in Britaine come a∣bout, which was determined within the compasse of 607. yeeres, and a notable alteration and change made in the Kingdome of England: which some lay upon the base a varice of the Magistrates, and the superstitious lazinesse of the Prelates: others impute to that Comet or blazing Starre, and the powerable influence of celestiall bodies: some againe made God the Author thereof, who in his secret judgements, and those never unjust, disposeth of King∣domes. Others also there were, who looked into neerer secondarie causes, and they found a great want and lacke of wisedome in King Edward, in that whiles under a goodly shew and pre∣text of religious and vowed virginitie, he casting off all care of having issue, exposed the Kingdome for a prey to ambitious humours. WHat an insolent and bloudie victorie this was, the Monks that write of it, have declamed with full mouth: neither is it to be doubed, but in this Victorie, (as it hapneth in other) wickednes tooke head and bare the full sway. William the Conquerour, in token as it were of a Trophee for this conquest, abrogated some part of the ancient positive lawes of England, brought in some Customes of Normandie. and by vertue of a decree, commanded, That all causes should be pleaded in the French tongue. The English hee thrust out of their ancient Inheritances, assigned their lands and Lord-ships to his souldiers, yet with this reservation to himself, that he should still remaine chiefe Lord and bind them to doe due service and homage unto him and his successors, that is to say, That all of them should hold their lands in Fee or fealty. He caused also a Seale for himselfe to be made of purpose, with this inscription upon the one side: Hôc Normannorum Guilielmum nosce Patronum, The Normans Patron William know, by this stamp that you see: And on the other: Hoc Anglis signo Regem fatearis eundem: By this, a King to Englishmen, acknowledge him to be. The seale of William. Conqueror. Moreover, as William of Malmesburie doth report, In imitation of Caesars policy, who expelled the Germans, (lying hidden within that huge forrest Ardenna, and by many asal∣lie from thence annoying his armie) not by the helpe of his owne Romans, but by the Gaules his confederates: to this end, that whiles strangers and aliens killed one another, himselfe might triumph with their bloud-shed: the very same course, I say, did William take with the English men. For, against certaine of them, who upon the first battell of that infortunate man Harold were fled into Denmarke and Ireland, and returned with a puissant armie in the third yeere after, he opposed meere English forces and an English generall; permitting the Normans to sit still and keepe holiday: foreseeing heereby and providing for his owne great easement, whether of them soever should have the better. Neither was he in this point frustrate of his purpose. For, the English, having thus a prettie while skuffeled and skirmished one with another, in the end rendred up the entire Victorie to the King, without his paines taking. And in another place: Having undermined and quite overthrowne the power of the Laimen, he provided by a sure and irrevocable edict, to suffer no Monke or Clerke of the English Nation, to endevour for to get any dignitie; much disagreeing herein from the clemencie and gentlenesse of King Cnuto in times past, who gave unto those that he conquered, all their honours entire. And hence it came to passe, that when hee was once dead, the naturall Inhabitants of the countrey upon light occasions fell to driving out of stran∣gers, and recovered unto themselves their ancient right and freedome. When he had brought this to passe, above all things hee laboured to turne away the storme of the Danish wars, that hung over his head, and to purchase peace, though it were with round sums of mony. Wherein he used Adelbert Archbishop of Ham∣burgh as his Instrument. For, Adam Bremensis writeth thus: Betweene Suen and the Bastard there was continuall strife about England, although our Bishop being greased in the hand with Williams bribes, would have concluded a firme peace betwixt the Kings. Which may seeme also to have beene established: for, since that time, Eng∣land was never any whit afraid of the Danes. And William verily betooke himselfe wholly to the defence and maintenance of his Imperiall dignitie, and to governe the state by excellent lawes. For, as Gervase of Tilburie writeth; When the renowned Con∣queror of England King William, had subdued the farther coasts of this Island, under his do∣minion, and throughly tamed the stomacks and hearts of rebels by terrible examples, lest that from thenceforth they should licentiously run into errour and commit trespasse, he determined to reduce his subjects under the obedience of positive, and written Lawes. Having therefore all the lawes of England laid before him, according to the Tripartite Division, whereby they were distinguished, that is to say, Merchenlag, Denelag, and Westsex-enlag, when hee had rejected some of them, and allowed of others, he adjoyned thereto those Lawes of Normandy. Neustria beyond the seas, which seemed most effectuall to preserve the peace of his Kingdome. After∣wards, as mine Author Ingulphus saith, who flourished in those daies, He commanded every Inhabitant of England to doe him homage, and to sweare fealtie to him against all men: He tooke the survey and description of the whole Land, neither was there an Hide of Eng∣land through, but he knew both the value, and the owner thereof; there was neither plash nor place, but set it was in the Kings Roll: and the rent, revenue, and profit thereof, the very te∣nure of possession, and possessour himselfe was made knowne to the King, according to the credit and true relation of certaine Taxers, who being chosen out of every country, did put downe in writing the territorie properly belonging thereto. And this Roll was called, the Roll of Winchester, and by the Englishmen (for the generalitie thereof, because it contained fully and exactly, all the tenements of the whole Land) named, Domesday. I have beene more willing to make mention of this booke, because it is to be cited & alleaged often times hereafter: which booke also, it pleaseth me to name, Gulielmi librum Censualem, that is, Domesday-booke. The Tax-booke of William: Angliae Notitiam, that is, The Notice of England: Angliae commentarios Censuales, that is, The Taxe Register, or Sessing booke of England: and Angliae Lustrum, that is, the Survey of England. But whereas Polydore Virgill writeth, how William that Conqueror, first brought in the Triall or Iudgement of A Jurie of twelve. twelve men, there is nothing more untrue. For, most certaine it is, and apparant by the lawes of Etheldred, that it was in use many yeares before. Neither hath he any cause to terme it a terrible Iudgement. For these 12. free-borne and lawfull men, are duely by order empannelled, and called forth of the Neighbourhood; these are bound by oath to pronounce and, deliver up their Verdict, As touching the fact. de facto: they heare the counsell pleading in courts on both sides before the Bench or Tri∣bunall, and the disposition of witnesses: then taking with them the evidences of both parties, they are shut up together; and kept from meat, drinke, and fire, (unlesse haply some one of them be in danger of death thereby) so long untill, they be all agreed of the fact: which when they have pronounced before the Judge, hee, according to right and law giveth his definitive sentence. For, this manner of triall our most sage and wise Ancestours have thought the best to finde out the truth, to avoid corruption, and cut off all partialitie and affections. Now, The warlike prowesse of the Normans. as touching martiall prowesse, how much the Normans excelled therein, let others tell: this may suffice for me to have said thus much, that being planted among most warlike nations, they alwaies saved themseves, not by obsequious basenesse, but by force of armes, and founded most noble Kingdomes in England, and Sicilie. For Tancrede, nephew unto Richard the second of that name, Duke of Normandie, and his posteritie, atchieved brave exploits in Italie, and having compelled the Sara∣zens to flie out of Sicilie, erected a Kingdome there. Whereupon the Sicilian Hi∣storiographer doth freely acknowledge, that the Sicilians are beholden unto the Normans, for that themselves remaine still in their native soile, live in freedome, and continue Christians. Th. Fazel. in the sixth book of the latter Decad. Likewise in the holy Land their martiall prowesse hath been seen with singular commendation. Hence it is also, that Roger Hoveden writeth in these termes; Bold France having made triall once of the Normans warfare, durst not peepe out: Fierce England being conquered, yielded as captive unto them: Rich Apulia falling to the lot of their possession flourished a fresh: Famous Ierusalem, and renowned Antioch were both subdued by them. And ever since their comming, England as well for martiall honour as civill behaviour, hath among the most flourishing Kingdomes of Christendome flourished with the best. In so much, as Englishmen were picked forth to guard the person of the Emperours of Constantinople. For, John the son of Alexius Come∣nus, (as our writer of Malmesburie reporteth) having their fidelitie in great esteeme, ap∣plied himselfe especially to their familiaritie, commending their love unto his son after him: and a long time since, they were the Yeomen of the said Emperours guard, called by Nice∣tes Choniata, Inglini Bipenniferj, that is, English Halberdiers or Bill men, and by Cu∣ropalata, Barangi. These attended upon the Emperour in every place, carrying Polaxes or Halberds upon their shoulders: which they tooke up, and held upright whensoever the Em∣perour shewed himselfe from out his Closet, and knocking then their Halberds one a∣gainst another to make a clattering noise, Chalcondilas. they in the English tongue, praied for his long life. As for that blot wherewith Chalcondilas hath besmutted our nation, for having wives in common, the truth it selfe washeth it cleane away, and represseth the overlashing vanitie of the Grecian. For, as saith that most learned man, and my singular good friend Ortelius in this very matter, those things be not alwaies true, which by every one are given out of all whatsoever. Well, these are the nations that seated them∣selves in Britaine, whereof remaine the Britans, Saxons, or English men, and Nor∣mans intermingled with them: the Scots also in the North: whereupon came the two Kingdomes in this Island, to wit, England and Scotland, long time divided, but most happily now in the most mightie Prince King Iames, under one Imperiall Dia∣deme conjoyned and united. Touching the Flemings, which flocked hither foure hundred yeares since, and by permission of the Kings, received a place in Wales to inhabit, it is not requisite to speake of them now, In Pembroke shire. elsewhere I will treat of that matter. But let us conclude this argument with Seneca. By these, it is manifest that nothing hath continued in the same place, Of consola∣tion to Albi∣na. wherein it had the first beginning. There is a daily stirring and mooving to and fro of mankind: some change or other there is every day in so great a revolution of this world. New foundations of Cities are laid: New names of nations spring up, whereas the old are either growne out of use, or altered by the comming in of a mightier. And considering that all these nations which have broken into Britaine, were Northern as all the rest, which about the same time over-ranne all Europe, and afterwards Asia; most truely from the authoritie of holy Scripture, Nicephorus. wrote Nicephorus, Like as terrors oftentimes are sent from heaven by God upon men, as lightning, fire, and tempestuous showers; oftentimes from the earth, as open gapings of the ground, and Earthquakes; often from the aire, as whirlewinds and extraordinarie stormes: so, these terrours of the Northerne and Hypor∣borean parts, God keepeth by him in store, to send them forth for some punishment, when, and among whom, it pleaseth him in his divine providence. THE DIVISION OF BRITAINE. How coun∣tries are divi∣ded. N Ow let us addresse our selves to the Division of Britaine. Countries are divided by Geographers, either Naturally, according to the course of ri∣vers, and interpose of mountaines: or Nationally, according as the people inhabite them: or Diversly and Civilly, according to the wils and juris∣diction of Princes. But forasmuch as wee shall treat here and there throughout the whole worke, of the first and second kinds, that third (which is civill and politike) seemeth properly pertinent to this place. Which yet is overcast with so darke a mist, through the iniquitie of former times, that much easier it is in this case to confute what is false, than to find out the truth. Our Historiographers will needs have that division of Britaine to be most ancient, whereby they divide it into Loegria, Cambria, and Albania, that is, to speake more plainely, into England, Wales, and Scotland. But I would think this division to be of a newer and later edition, both because it is threefold; for it seemeth to have risen of those three sorts of people, English, Welch, and Scotish, which last of all parted the Island among themselves: and also for that such a partition is no where extant in ap∣proved Authors before our Geffery of Monmouth. For, the fable, (as the Criticks of our age doe thinke) could not hang well together, unlesse he the said Geffrey had de∣vised three sonnes of Brutus, to wit, Locrine, Camber, and Albanact, because so many Nations flourished heere when he lived. Neither make they doubt, but hee would have found out more children of Brutus, if there had beene more nations distinct at the same time in Britaine. The most ancient division of Britaine in the opinion of many learned men is that, which is found in Ptolomee, in the second booke of Cap. 6. Mathematicall Construction, where he threatneth the Parallels: namely, into Britaine the GREAT, and the LESSE. But by their leave, Britan Great and Small. as great learned men as they be, they themselves shal see, if it please them to examine throughly and exactly in that place, the proportion of distance from the Aequator, and compare the same with his Geographicall Descriptions, that hee calleth this our Island there, Britaine the GREAT, and Ireland, Britaine the LESSE. Howbeit some of our later writers named the hither part of this Island to∣ward the South, GREAT, and that farther part Northward, the LESSE: the Inhabi∣tants whereof in times past, were distinguished into MAIATAE, and CALEDONII, that is to say, into the habitation of the Champian, or Plaines, and the Mountainers: as now, the Scots are divided into Hechtlandmen, and Lawlandmen. But for as much as the Romans cared not for that farther tract, because (as Appian saith, it could not be profitable for them nor fruitfull; having set downe their bounds not farre from Edenburgh, Britaine the Higher, and the Lower. at the first they made this hither part reduced already into a Province, two-fold, to wit, the LOVVER, and the HIGHER, as it is gathered out of Dio. For, the hither or neerer part of England, together with Wales, he termeth the HIGHER, the farther and Northern part the LOVVER. Which thing the very seats, and abi∣ding places of the Legions in Dio do prove. The second Legion Augusta, ich kept at Caerleon in Wales, and the twentieth surnamed Victrix, which remained at Chester or Deva, he placeth in the Higher Britaine: but the Sixth Legion Victrix, that was resident at Yorke, served, as he writeth, in the Lower Britaine. This division I would suppose, was made by the Emperour Severus, because Herodian reporteth, that hee after hee had vanquished Albinus Generall of the British forces, who had usurped the Empire, and therewith reformed, and set in order the State of Britain, divided the government of the Province in two parts, betweene two Prefects, or Governours. After this, the Romans did set out the Province of Britaine into three parts, as is to be seen out of a manuscript of Sextus Rufus: Tripartite Britaine. namely, into MAXIMA CAESARI∣ENSIS, BRITANNIA PRIMA, and BRITANNIA SECVNDA. Which, I take it, I have found out by the Bishops, and their ancient Diocesses. Lucius the Pope, in Gratian, Dist. 80. cap. 1. insinuateth thus much, that the Ecclesiasticall Iurisdictions of the Christi∣ans, followed the Iurisdictions of the Roman Magistrates, and that Archbishops had their Seas in those cities, wherein the Romane Presidents in times past made their a∣bode. The Cities and places (saith he) in which Primats ought to sit and rule, were appointed not by the Moderne, but long before the comming of Christ: to the Primats of which Cities &c. the Gentile also appealed in matters of greater importance. And in those verie cities after Christs comming, the Apostles and their Successors placed Patriarks, or Primats, unto whom the affaires of the Bishops, and greater causes ought to be preferred. Whereas therefore, Bri∣taine had in old time three Archbishops, to wit, of London, of Yorke, and Caerleon in Southwales, I suppose, that the Province which now we call of Canterburie, (for thither the Sea of London was translated) made BRITANNIA PRIMA: Wales un∣der the Chester. Citie of Caer Leon, was BRITANNIA SECVNDA: and the Province of York, which then reached unto the Limit or Borders, made MAXIMAA CAESARIENSIS. In the age next ensuing, when the forme of the Roman Empire was daily chan∣ging, either through ambition, that more men might attaine to places of honour, or the warie forecast of the Emperours, that the power of their Presidents which grew over great might be taken downe and abridged, they divided Britaine into five parts, to wit, BRITANNIA PRIMA, SECVNDA, MAXIMA CAESARIENSIS, VALENTIA & FLAVIA CAESARIENSIS. Britaine in five parts. VALENTIA seemeth to have been the northerly part of Maxi Caesariensis, which being usurped and held by the Picts and Scots, Theodo∣sius Generall under Valens the Emperour recovered out their hands, and in honour of him named it Valentia, which Marcellinus sheweth more plainly in these words▪ The Province now recovered, Lib. 28. which was fallen into the enemies hands, he restored to the for∣mer state, in such sort, as by his own procuring it had both a lawful governor, & was also after∣wards called, VALENTIA, at the pleasure of the Prince. Now that the son of this Theodo∣sius, (who being created Emperour was named Flavius Theodosius, and altered very many things in the Empire) added Flavia, we may very wel conjecture, for that before the time of this Flavius wee read no where of BRITANNIA FLAVIA. Wherefore to make up this matter in few words, All the south coast which of one side lieth between the British sea, and the river Thames with the Severn sea on the other side, was called BRITANNIA PRIMA. BRITANNIA SECVNDA, was that which now is Wales. FLAVIA CAESARIENSIS, reacheth from Thames to Humber. MAXIMA CAESARIENSIS, from Humber to the river of Tine, or the wall of Severus. VALENTIA from Tine to the wall or rampier neere Edenburgh, which the Scots call Gramesdike, and was the utmost limit of the Roman Empire in this Island, when this last division was in use. And now I cannot chuse but note some want of judgement in certaine men, who otherwise being very learned, doe reckon Scotland in this account, which some of them make to have beene Maxima Caesariensis, and others, Britannia Secunda: As if (forsooth) the Romans neglected not that part of the Island, lying under a cold cli∣mate, and reckoned here those Provinces onely, which they governed by Consular Lieutenants, and Presidents: for Maxima Caesariensis, and Valentia were ruled by Con∣sular Lieutenants; Britannia Prima, Secunda, and Flavia, by Presidents. Now if any man would have me render a reason of this my division, and accuse me as a false bounderer and surveior, let him heare in briefe, what hath induced mee to this opinion. Having observed thus much, that the Romans alwaies called those Pro∣vinces PRIMAS, which lay nighest to Rome: as Germania Prima, Belgica Prima, Lug∣dunensis Prima, Aquitania Prima, Panninia Prima ; all which lay neerer to Rome, than those that were named, Secundae: and that these Primae, were by the finer sort of wri∣ters, termed Superiores, or higher: the Secundae, Inferiores, or Lower: I resolved, that the South-part of our Island, and neerer to Rome, was Britannia Prima. By the same reason seeing the Provinces Secundae (as they call them) were more remote from Rome, I sup∣posed Wales was the Britannia Secunda. Moreover, having noted this also, that in the decaying State of their Empire, those Provinces onely had Consular Magistrates, which lay against the enemies, not onely in Gaule, but also in Africke, as appeareth in the booke of Notices: also, that in the said Booke, Valentia with us, and Maxima Caesa∣riensis be accounted Consular Provinces; I have judged them being next and exposed to the Scots and Picts, to lie in those places which I have spoken of. I can doe no o∣ther but guesse, that Flavia Caesariensis here, was in the midst betweene them all, and in the very heart of England: and so much the more confidently, because that ancient writer Giraldus Cambrensis, is just of the same opinion with me. And thus much of the Divisions of Britaine under the Romans. Afterwards, when the Barbarians made invasion on every side, and civill war daily increased among the Britans, the Island, as bereft of all life and vigour, lay for a time languishing and forlorne, without any shew at all of government. But at length that part which inclineth to the North became two Kingdomes, to wit, of the Scots and the Picts, and the Romans Pentarchie, or five portions, in this hither part became in processe of time the Heptarchie, or seven Kingdomes, of the Saxons. For, they divi∣ded the whole Province of the Romans, (setting Wales aside, which the remnant of Britans possessed) into seven Kingdomes, that is to say, Kent, Southsex, East-England, Westsex, The Saxons Heptarchie or seven King∣domes. Northumberland, Eastsex, and Mercia. But what this Heptarchie of the English-Saxons was, and what their names were in those daies, in this chorographical table here adjoyned you may (if you please) behold. Considering that in a Chorographicall Table or Map, by reason of so narrow a roome, those Regions or Counties which these Kingdomes contained, could not well and handsomely bee described: In this other Table heere, rather than by heaping many words together, I thinke good to propose, and set downe the same, that the Reader may once for all have a view of them. The Sax∣ons Hep∣tarchie. 1 The Kingdome of KENT con∣tained the Coun∣tie of Kent. 2 The Kingdom of SVSSEX, or Southern Saxons, contained the Coun∣ties of Suthsex. Suthrey. 3 The Kingdome of EAST-ENGLAND, or East-Angles, contained the Coun∣ties of Norfolke. Suthfolke. Cambridge shire, with the Isle of Ely. 4 The Kingdome of WEST∣SEX, or West-Angles, con∣tained the Coun∣ties of Cornwall. Devonshire. Dorsetshire. Somersetshire. Wiltshire. Southampton. Berkshire. 5 The Kingdome of NORT∣HVMBERLAND, contained the Coun∣ties of Lancaster. Yorke. Durham. Cumberland. Westmorland. Northumberland, and the Countries of Scotland to Edenburgh-frith. 6 The Kingdome of EAST∣SEX, or East-Saxons, con∣tained the Coun∣ties of Essex. Middlesex, and part of Hertfordshire. 7 The Kingdome of MERCIA, contained the Coun∣ties of Glocester shire. Herefordshire. Worcestershire. Warwickshire. Leicestershire. Rotlandshire. Northamptonshire. Lincolneshire. Huntingdonshire. Bedfordshire. Buckinghamshire. Oxenfordshire. Staffordshire. Derbieshire. Salop or Shropshire. Nottinghamshire. Chester, or Cheshire. The other part of Hertford¦shire. YEt was not England when the Heptarchie flourished, thus divided into Coun∣ties, for so they be commonly called, England di∣vided into Shires or Counties. but into certaine small regions with their Hides, which out of an old fragment that I had of Francis Tate a gentleman, most conversant in the Antiquitie of our Law, I have heere put downe. But it containeth that country onely, which lieth on this side Humber. Myrcna containeth 30000. An Hide, as some thinke, is so much land, as one plough can eare in one yeare: as others thinke, 4. yard-lands. Hides. Woken-setna 7000. hides. Westerna 7000. hides. Pec-setna 1200. hides. Elmed-setna 600. hides. Lindes-farona 7000. hides. Suth-Gyrwa 600. hides. North-Gyrwa 600. hides. East-Wixna 300. hides. West-Wixna 600. hides. Spalda 600. hides. Wigesta 900. hides. Herefinna 1200. hides. Sweordora 300. hides. Eyfla 300. hides. Wicca 300. hides. Wight-gora 600, hides. Nox gaga 5000. hides. Oht gaga 2000. hides. Hwynca 7000. hides. Ciltern-setna 4000. hides. Hendrica 3000. hides. Vnecung-ga 1200. hides. Aroseatna 600. hides. Fearfinga 300. hides. Belmiga 600. hides. Witherigga 600. hides. East-willa 600. hides. West-willa 600. hides. East-Engle 30000. hides. East-Sexena 7000. hides. Cant-warena 15000. hides. Suth-Sexena 7000. hides. West-Sexena 100000. hides. Although some of these names may at the first sight be discovered, yet others of them a man shall hardly picke out although hee studie upon them: and they require one I professe it, of much sharper wit and quicker insight than my selfe, to guesse what they should meane. Aelfred he is named in pieces of Coine: also Alured, in our English Chronicles. Afterwards, when Aelfred was sole Monarch, like as the Germans our ancestors, as Tacitus witnesseth, kept courts and ministred justice in every Territorie and town, and had a Hundred men out of the the Common people as companions and assistants to per∣forme this function: even so, to use the words of ingulphus of Crowland, He first divided England into Counties, for that the neighbour Inhabitants after the example, and under co∣lour of the Danes committed outrages and robberies. Besides, hee caused the Counties to be parted into Centuries, Hundreds. that is Hundreds, and Decimes, that is Tithings: and command∣ded withall that every Homeling or naturall Inhabitant should bee in some one Hundred and Tithing. Hee divided also the governours of the Provinces, who before were called Vice-Domini, that is, Vice-Lords, into two offices, to wit, Iudges, now Iustices, and Vice-Comites, that is, Sheriffes, which still retaine the same name. By whose care and industrie, peace so much flourished within short space through the whole Province, that had a way-fa∣ring man let fall in the fields or common highwaies, a summe of money, how great soever it had beene, if he returned thither the next morning or a moneth after he might bee sure to see it there safe and untouched. Which our Historiographer of Malmesburie will de∣clare unto you more at large. By occasion, saith he, and example of the Barbarians, that is, Danes, the proper and naturall Inhabitants also were very greedy of spoile, so that no man could passe to and fro in safety, without weapons for his defence. Aelfred therefore or∣dained Centuries, which they terme Hundreds, and Decimes, which they call Tithings, that every English m living under law, as a liege subject, should bee within one Hundred and Tithing, or another. And if a man were accused of any transgression, hee should bring in straightwaies some one out of the same Hundred and Tithing, that would bee bound for his appearance to answer the law; but he that could not find such a surety, should abide the se∣verity of the Lawes. But in case any man standing thus accused, either before or after sure∣tiship, fled, then all that Hundred and Tithing, incurred a mulct or fine to bee imposed by the King. By this device he brought peace into the Country, so as along the common causies and highwaies where they crossed one another, he commanded bracelets of gold to be hanged up, to delude the greedinesse of passengers, Wapentaks, Tithings and Lathes. whiles there was no man that durst take thē away. But these Hundreds be in some places of the realme called Wapentaches: if you would know the reason therof, I wil tel you it out of the laws of Edward the Confessor. When a man received the government of a Wapentach, upon a certaine day appointed in the place where they were wont to assemble, all the elder sort met together and expected him: and as hee a∣lighted from his horse, rose up unto him and did him reverence. Then he, setting his speare upright, received of them all, according to the custome, a covenant of Association. For, as many as came, with their speares touched his speare, and thus they assured themselves by touching of weapons, in peaceable manner. For, armes in English they call , & is as much as to confirme or establish: as if this were a comfirmation of weapons: or, to speak more significantly and expresly according to the English tongue, Wepentac, is the touching of weapons. For soundeth as much, as armes, is touching. There were besides, other governments and jurisdictions above Wepantaches which they called , for that this was the third part of a Province. And the rulers over those were termed . Before these officers were brought those causes that could not be de∣termined, in the Wapentachs. And so, that which the Englishmen named a Hundred, these termed a Wapentach. And that which in English they called three or foure Hundreds, these named . Howbeit in some Provinces they called that , which these terme Trihing: Leth. and that which could not be decided and ended in a , was brought into the Schyre. These Counties which you may properly and in Latine call, Shires. either Conventus or Pagos, we by a peculiar terme name Shires, of a Saxon word, which signifieth, to part or divide: and at the first division, were there in all but thirtie two. For, in the yeare after Christs nativitie 1016. whiles Etheldred raigned, the Chronicle of Mal∣mesburie reporteth there was no more: For, thus writeth hee in the life of the said Etheldred. The Danes at this time when there bee reckoned in England thirty two Shires, invaded 16. of them. And in those daies, according to the varietie of lawes these counties or shires were divided. The division of England according to the Lawes. For the lawes of England were distinguished into three sorts: to wit, those of the West-Saxons which they called West-Saxenlage: those of the Danes, named Denelage, and those of the Mercians, termed Merchenlage. To the law of the West-Saxons belonged nine counties, to wit, Kent, Sussex, Suthrie, Berkshire, Hantshire or Southampton, Wiltshire, Sommersetshire, Dorsetshire, and Den∣shire. To the Danes law appertained 15. The manu∣script booke of S. Edmund. Counties, namely, Yorkeshire, Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, Essex, Middlesex, Northfolk, Suffolk, Cam∣bridgeshire, Huntingdonshire. The eight remaining, followed the law of the Merci∣ans: there were, Glocestershire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Warwickshire, Ox∣enfordshire, Cheshire, Salop or Shropshire, and Staffordshire. But when William the First made a survey and taxed this Kingdome, there were reckoned, as wee reade in Polychronicon, xxxvj. shires or counties: and yet the publike D omesday booke. record, in which he engrossed and registred this survey and taxe, doe make mention of 34. onely. For, Durham, Lancashire, Northumberland, Westmorland, and Comberland were not comprised in that number, because these three last were then subject to the Scots, as some will have it, and those other two were either free from paiments and taxes, or comprehended under Yorkshire: but being afterwards added to the rest they made up in all, Wales divided into Shires. the number of 39. shires, which we have at this day. Unto which are adjoy∣ned since 13. more in Wales: whereof sixe were in the time of Edward the First, the rest Henry the Eighth ordained by Parliamentarie authoritie. In these Shires there is appointed in troublesome times by the Prince, a Prefect or Deputie under the King, whom they call a Lieutenant, to see that the Common∣weale sustaine no hurt. The first Institution of this Lieutenant, as it may seeme, is to be fetched from King Aelfred, who appointed in every Countie certaine Custodes or Keepers of the Kingdome: whom Henry the Third afterward did set up and restore againe, naming them Capitaines. For hee in the fiftieth yeare of his raigne, Held a Parliament as Iohn or, London. 897. Math. Westmonast. of London writeth, wherein this wholesome ordinance was enacted, that in every Countie there should be made at the Kings charge, one Captaine, who with the helpe of the Sheriffe should restraine the cruel and outragious robbers & theeves from stealth and rapine. Many therefore being frighted with this terrour gave over, and so the Kings power began to breath againe and revive. With good forecast this was done verily by this Prince: but whether Canutus the Dane did more wisely, who in his Monarchie erected a Tetrarchie, let our Politicians and Statists dispute. For he, (Hermandus the Archdeacon is mine Author) being a prudent Prince, He flourished in the yeare, 1070. and watchfull every way, dividing the care of his Kingdome into foure parts, ordained Tetrarchs, such as hee had found to bee most faithfull and trusty. The charge of the greatest portion, to wit, Westsex, hee tooke upon himselfe; of Mercia. Mircha, which was the second portion, he committed to one Edrich; the third, usually called Northumbre, to Yrtus, and to Turkil Earle of East-Englan, the fourth; which flowed in plenty and abundance of all wealth. For this instruction I am beholden to the diligence of Francis Thinn, a man, who with exceeding great commendation hath travelled very much in this Studie of Antiquities. Sheriffe of the Shire. Now every yeare, some one of the Gentlemen Inhabitants, is made ruler of the countie wherein he dwelleth, whom we call in Latin Vicecomitem, as one would say, the Deputie of the Comes or Earle, and in our tongue Sheriffe, that is, the Reeve of the shire, who also may well be termed the Treasurer of the Shire or Province. For, it is his dutie, to gather the common monies and profits of the Prince in his Countie, to col∣lect and bring into the Exchequer all fines imposed, even by distreining: to be atten∣dant upon the Judges, and to execute their commandements: to assemble and em∣panell the twelue men which in causes do enquire of the fact, Twelve men. and make relation ther∣of and give in their verdict to the Judges (for Judges with us sit upon the right onely of a cause and not upon the fact) to see condemned persons executed, and to examine and determine certaine smaller actions. Justices of peace. Moreover, there bee ordained in everie Shire, and that by the institution of Edward the Third, certaine Justices of peace, who exa∣mine Murders, Felonies, and Trespasses, as they cal them, yea and many other delinquen∣ces. Furthermore, the King sendeth yearely into every Shire of England two Justices, to give Judgement of prisoners, Justices of Assises. and that I may use the Lawyers terme, to deliver the Goale. Of whom, more heereafter in the Treatise of Iudiciall courts and Iudgment seats. As touching Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, when the Bishops of Rome had assigned severall Churches to severall Priests, England di∣vided into Parishes. and laid parishes unto them, Honorius Arch∣bishop of Canterburie, about the yeare of our Redemption 636. began first to diuide England into parishes, as wee reade in the Historie of Canterburie. But now hath England two provinces, and accordingly two Archbishops: to wit, the Archbishop of Canterburie Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and the Archbishop of Yorke. Bishops. Vnder these are twenty five Bishops: to the Archbishop of Canterburie are subject twentie two, to the Archbishop of Yorke, the other three. Now what Bi∣shoprickes these be, with the shires and Diocesses that are at this day under their ju∣risdiction, that godly, and right reverend father Matthew Parker, [late] Archbishop of Canterburie, a man very studious and skilfull in antiquitie, and a worthy Patron of good learning, sheweth in these his owne words. IN THE PROVINCE OF CANTERBVRIE. THe Bishopricke of Canterburie together with that of Rochester containeth un∣der it Kent it selfe. The Bishopricke of London hath under it Essex, Middlesex, & part of Hertfordshire. The Bishoprick of Chichester hath belonging unto it Sussex. The Bishoprick of Winchester compriseth Southhampton shire, Surry, and the Isle of Wight, Gernsey also and Iersey, Islands lying against Normandy. The Bishoprick of Salisburie, cōprehendeth Wiltshire and Berkshire. The Bishoprick of Excester contai∣neth Denshire and Cornwall. The Bishoprick of Bath and Wels joined together, hath under it Sommersetshire: The Bishoprick of Glocester hath belonging to it Glocester∣shire. To the Bishoprick of Worcester, is subject Worcestershire & part of Warwick∣shire. To the Bishoprick of Hereford, Herefordshire & part of Salop or Shropshire. The Bishopricke of Coventrie and Lichfield joyned together, have under it, Staffordshire, Derbishire and the other part of Warwickshire, as also that part of Shropshire which lieth toward the river Repil. Then, the Bishoprick of Lincolnshire, which of all other is the greatest, is bounded with Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Huntingdonshire, Bed∣fordshire, Buckinghamshire, and the other part of Hertfordshire. To the Bishoprick of Ely pertaine Cambridgeshire, and the Isle it selfe of Elie. Vnder the Bishopricke of Norwich is Norfolke and Suffolke. The Bishopricke of Oxenford hath under it Oxenfordshire. The Bishopricke of Peterborough compriseth Northamptonshire and Rutlandshire. Under the Bishopricke of Bristoll, is Dorsetshire. Vnto which eighteene Diocesses in England, are to be added those of Wales, which are both bereft of their owne peculiar Archbishopricke, and made also fewer in number; seven be∣ing brought scarce to foure: to wit, the Bishopricke of Meneva, having the seat at Saint Davids, the Bishopricke of Landaffe; the Bishopricke of Bangor, and the Bi∣shopricke of Saint Assaph. IN THE PROVINCE OF YORKE. THe Bishopricke of Yorke comprehendeth Yorkeshire it selfe, and Nottingham∣shire. The Bishopricke of Chester containeth, Cheshire, Richmondshire, Lan∣cashire, part of Cumberland, of Flintshire, and of Denbishire. The Bishopricke of Durham, hath Durham it selfe under it, and Northumberland. The Bishopricke of Carleil containeth within it part of Cumberland, and the Country of Westmer∣land. To these you may adde, the Bishopricke of Sodor, in the Isle of Mona, which commonly is called Man. Among these, the Archbishop of Canterburie hath the first place: the Archbishop of Yorke the second: the Bishop of London the third: the Bishop of Durham the fourth: the Bishop of Winchester the fifth: the rest as they are consecrated or enstalled first, so in prioritie they take the place. Howbeit, if any of the other Bishops happen to be Secretary to the King, hee challengeth by his right the fift place. Besides, there are in England Deaneries xxvj. whereof thir∣teene were ordained by Henrie the Eighth in the greater Cathedrall Churches after the Monks were thrust out. Archdeaconries three skore: Dignities and Prebends five hundred fortie foure. Numbred also there are parish-churches under Bishops, 9284: of which 3845, be Appropriat, as I find in a Catalogue exhibited unto King Iames, which here I have put downe underneath. Now, Appropriat Churches those are called, which by the Popes authority comming betweene, with consent of the King and the Bishop of the Dio∣cesse were upon certaine conditions tied, or as the forme runneth, of our Law, united, annexed, and incorporate for ever, unto Monasteries, Bishopricks, Colledges and Hospi∣tals, endowed with small lands, either for that the said Churches were built with in their Lordships and lands, or granted by the Lords of the said lands. Which Chur∣ches afterwards when the Abbaies and Monasteries were suppressed, became Laye Fees, to the great dammage of the Church. DIOECESES. Parish-Churches. Churches appropriated Of Canterburie. 257 140 Of London. 623 189 Of Winchester. 362 131 Of Coventrie and Lichfield. 557 250 Of Sarisburie. 248 109 Of Bath and Wels. 388 160 Of Lincoln. 1255 577 Of Peter-burgh. 293 91 Of Exceter. 604 239 Of Glocester. 267 125 In the Province of Canter∣burie in the Diocesse, Of Hereford. 313 166 Of Norwich. 1121 385 Of Elie. 141 75 Of Rochester. 98 36 Of Chichester. 250 112 Of Oxford, 195 88 Of Worcester. 241 76 Of Bristoll. 236 64 Of S. Davids. 308 120 Of Bangor. 107 36 Of Lhandaffe. 177 98 Of S. Asaph. 121 19 Peculiar, in the Province of Canterburie. 57 14 The summe of the Province of Canterburie. 8 19 3303 Of Yorke. 581 336 Of Durham. 135 87 In the Province of Yorke, Of Chester. 256 101 Of Carlile. 93 18 The summe of the Province of Yorke. 1065 592 The totall Summe in both Provinces 9284 3845 Howbeit, in the booke of Thomas Wolsey Cardinall, digested and written in The yeere 1520. by Counties are reckoned, 9407. Churches. How this varietie should come, I cannot say, unlesse that in the former age some Churches were pulled downe, and the Chappels which belong unto Parishes be omitted, and others that are but bare Chappels, counted in the number of Parish-churches. Yet, out of this booke of Wolsey, have I put downe the number of Parish-churches to every Shire. There were also, in the reigne of Henrie the Eight (I hope without offence I may speake the truth) many religious places, Monuments of our fore-fathers pietie and de∣votion, to the honor of God, the propagation of Christian faith and good learning, and also for the reliefe and maintenance of the poore and impotent, Monasteries or Abbaies. to wit, Monasteries or Abbaies, and Priories, to the number of 645: of which when by permission of Pope Clement the seventh, fortie were suppressed by Cardinall Wolseies meanes, who then had begun to found two Colledges, one at Oxenford, the other at Ipswich: straight waies, about the xxxvj. yeere of the reigne of the said Henrie the Eight, a sudden floud (as it were) breaking thorow the banks with a maine streame, fell upon the Ecclesiasti∣call State of England; which whiles the world stood amazed, and England groned thereat, bare downe and utterly overthrew the greatest part of the Clergie, together with their most goodly and beautifull houses. For, that leave which the Pope granted to the Cardinall; the King with assent of the Parliament tooke to himselfe. Where∣upon, in the yeere of our Lord, 1536. all religious houses every one, together with all their livings and revenewes, as many I meane as might dispend by yeerely rent 200. pound or under, (and those amounted to the number of 376) were granted to the King. And in the yeere next following, under a faire pretence and shew of rooting out super∣stition, all the rest, An hundred Priories of Monks Ali∣ens, King Henrie the Fift, had dis∣solved before. together with Colledges, Chanteries and Hospitals were left to the dispose and pleasure of the King. At which time, the religious houses remaining, in number 605. were surveied, valued or taxed. Colledges there were, besides those in the Vniversities, 90. Hospitals 110. Chan eries and free Chappels 2374. All which for the most part, shortly after were every where pulled downe, their revenues sold and made away, & those goods & riches which the Christian pietie of the English na∣tion had consecrated unto God, since they first professed Christianity were in a mo∣ment as it were dispersed, and (to the displeasure of no man be it spoken) prophaned. THE STATES AND DEGREES of England. A S touching the division of our Common-wealth, it consisteth, of a King or Monarch, Noblemen or Gentry, Citizens, Free-borne, whom we call, Yeomen, and Artisans or Handicraftsmen. THE KING, The King whom our ancestors [the English-Saxons] called Coning and Gynin , (in which name is implied a significa∣tion both of power and skill) and wee name contractly, King, hath soveraigne power and absolute command among us, neither holdeth he his Empire in vassalage, not receiveth his investure or c stalling of another, e yet acknowledgeth any superiour but God alone: and as one said, All verily are un∣der him, and himselfe under none, but God onely ▪ Also, he hath very many rights of Ma∣jestie peculiar to himselfe, (the learned Lawyers terme them, Sacra sacrorum, that is Sa∣cred, and Individua ; that is, inseparable, because they cannot be severed: and the com∣mon sort Royall prerogatives ) which they to me, Bracton. lib. 1. cap. 8. The flowers of his Crowne, in which re∣spect they affirme that the regall materiall Crowne is adorned with flowers. Some of these, are by positive or written law; others, by right of custome, which by a silent consent of all men without law, prescription of ime hath allowed, the King justly enjoieth: and most deservedly; considering that His watchfull care defendeth the state of all, his painfull labour maintaineth the rest of all, Seneca. his spadious industry upholdeth the de ights of all, and his busie employment affordeth case to all. But these are points of a lo ier discourse, and not of the argument now in hand. The Prince. The second or next to the King, is his first begotten sonne: who, like as among the Romans, the heire apparant, and assigned successour to the Empire, was first entitu∣led, Princeps Iuventutis, that is, Prince of the youth; and afterwards (as flatterie did in∣crease) stiled by the name of Caesar, Nobilis Caesar. Noble Caesar, and the Caesar Nobi∣lissimus. most Noble: so, with our Ancestors the English-Saxons, hee was named in their tongue, Aetheling, that is, No∣ble, and in Latine Clito, of the Greeke word, , that is, Glorious or Excellent (see how that age affected the Greeke Language.) And hereupon, of that Eadgar, the last heire male of the English bloud royall, this old said saw is yet rife in every mans mouth, . And in the ancient latine Patents and Char∣ters of the Kings wee read often times, Ego E. vel Ae. Clyto, Regis filius: But this ad∣dition Clyto, I have observed to be given even to all the Kings sonnes. After the Nor∣man conquest, no certaine or speciall title of honour was assigned unto him, nor any other to my knowledge, than singly thus, The Kings sonne, and, The first begotten of the King of England, untill that Edward the first summoned unto the high Court of Par∣liament his sonne Edward, by the name of Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester ; unto whom he granted afterwards, the Dukedome also of Aquitain: like as the same Prince, being now King Edward the Second, called unto the Parliament his young sonne Ed∣ward, not full ten yeeres old, by the title of Earle of Chester, and of Flint. But the said Edward, having now attained to the Crowne, and being Edward the Third, created Edward his sonne, a most valiant and renowned man of warre, Duke of Cornwall. Since which time, the Kings first begotten sonne, is reputed Dux Cornu∣biae natus. Duke of Cornewall at the houre of his birth. And soone after, he adorned the same sonne by solemne investure and creation, with the title of Prince of Wales. And gave the Principality of Wales in these words, To be held of him and his heires Kings of England. And as the declared or e∣lect Successours of the Roman Empire, (as I said even now) were named Caesares, of the Greekish Empire, Lords. Despotae ; of the Kingdome of France, Dolphins, and of Spaine, In∣fants: so from thence forward, the Heires apparant of the Kingdome of England, were entituled, Princes of Wales. And this title continued unto the daies of Henrie the Eight, when Wales was fully united to the Kingdome of England. But now, whereas the Kingdomes of Britaine formerly divided, are by the happy good luck, and rightfull title of the most mighty Prince, King Iames growen into one; his Eldest sonne Henrie, the Lovely Ioy and Dearling of Britaine, is stiled, PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAINE: who, as he is borne thus to the greatest hopes, so all Britaine from one end to the other, prayeth uncessantly from the very heart, that God would vouchsafe to blesse him with the greatest vertues, and continuance of honour, that hee may by many degrees, and that most happily exceede our hope, surpasse the noble Acts of his Progenitours, yea, and outlive their yeeres. As for our Nobilitie, or Gentry, it is divided into Superiour, and Inferiour. The Superiour or chiefe No∣blemen we call, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, and Barons: which have received these titles from the Kings of this Realme for their Vertue and Prowesse. A Duke. DVKE, is the chiefe title of honour among us next after PRINCE. This was a name at first of charge and office, and not of dignitie. About the time of Aelius Verus the Emperour, those who governed the Limits and Borders, were first named Duces, and this degree in the daies of Constantine was inferiour to that of Comites. After the Romane government was heere in this Iland abolished, this title also re¦mained as a name of office: and those among us, who in old Charters, during the Saxons time, Dukes. are so many of them called Duces, were named in the English tongue onely Ealdermen: and the verie same, that were named Duces, they called also, Earles. Co∣mites. As for example, that William the Conquerour of England, whom most call Duke of Normandie, William of Malmsburie, termeth Comes, or Earle of Norman∣die. But, as well Duke as Earle, were names of charge and office, as appeareth by this Briefe or Instrument of creating a Duke or Earle, out of Marculphus an ancient Writer. In this point especially is a Princes regall Clemencie fully commended, that thorow∣out the whole people there bee sought out honest and vigilant persons; neither is it meete to commit hand over head, unto every man a judiciarie Dignity, unlesse his faithfulnesse and valour seeme to have beene tried before: seeing then therefore, we suppose that we have had good proofe of your trustie and profitable service unto us, wee have committed unto you the government of that Earledome, Dukedome, Senatourship, or Eldership in that Shire or Province, which your Predecessor untill this time seemed to have exercised, for to manage and rule the same accordingly. Provided alwaies, that you evermore keepe your faith un∣touched and untainted toward our Royall governance, and that all people there abiding may live, and be ruled under your regiment and governance, and that you order and direct them in the right course, according to law, and their owne customes: That you shew your selfe a Pro∣tector to widowes, and Guardian to Orphans: that the wickednesse of theeves and malefactors be most severely by you punished: that the people living well under your regiment, may with joy continue in peace quietly: and whatsoever by this very execution is looked for to arise, in profit due to the Exchequer bee brought yeerely by your selfe into our Coffers, and Treasurie. This title of Duke, began to be a title of honour under Otho the Great, about the yeere 970. For hee, to bind more streitly, and neerer unto him, martiall and politike men, endowed them with Regalities and Roialties, as hee termed them. Sigonius Regni Italici lib. 5. And these Roial∣ties were either Dignities, or Lands in fee. Dignities were these, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Capitaines, Valvasors, Valvasines. Later it was ere it came to bee an Hereditarie title in France: and not before the time of Philip the third King of France, who gran∣ted, that from thence forth, they should bee called, Dukes of Britaine, who before time were indifferently stiled, both Dukes and Earles. But in England, in the time of the Normans, seeing the Norman Kings themselves were Dukes of Normandie, for a great while they adorned none with this honour: nor before that Edward the Third created Edward his sonne, Duke of Cornwall, by a wreath upon his head, a ring on his finger, Afterward a golden rod or verger was used. and a silver verge or rod: like as the Dukes of Normandie were in times past created by a Sword, and Banner delivered unto them: afterwards, by girding the Sword of the Dutchie, and a circlet of gold, garnished with little golden Roses in the top. And the same King Edward the Third, created in a Parliament his two sonnes, Lionel Duke of Cla∣rence, and Iohn Duke of Lancaster, by the girding of a Sword, and setting upon their heads a furred chapeau, or cap, with a circlet or Coronet of gold, pearle, and a Charter delivered un∣to them. From which time there have beene many hereditary Dukes among us, crea∣ted one after another, with these or such like words in their Charter or Patent: We give and grant the Name, Title, State, Stile, Place, Seat, Preheminence, Honour, Authoritie, and Dignitie of a Duke, to N. and by the cincture of a Sword, and imposition of a Cap and Coronet of gold upon his head, as also by delivering unto him a verge of gold, we doe really invest. A MARQVESSE, that is, if you consider the very nature of the word, a Gover∣nour of the Marches, Marquestes. hath the next placec of honour, after a Duke. This Title came to us but of late daies, and was not bestowed upon any one, before the time of King Richard the Second: For, hee made his minion Robert Vere, who was highly in his favour, Marquesse of Dublin: and then it began with us to be a title of honour. F r before time those that governed the Marches, were commonly called, Lord Marchers, and not Marquesses (as now we terme them. Henceforth they were created by the King, by cincture of the Sword, and the imposition of the Cap of honor and dignitie, with the Coronet, as also by delivery of a Charter or writing. Neither will I think it much to relate here, that which is found recorded in the An. 4. Hen∣ri . 4. Parliament Rols. When Iohn de Beaufort, from beeing Earle of Sommerset, was by Richard the Second created Marquesse Dorset, and afterwards by Henrie the Fourth, deprived of that title; what time as the Commons of England made humble suit in Parliament to the King, that hee would restore unto him the title of Marquesse which he had lost: he opposed himselfe against that petition, and openly said, That it was a new dignitie, and altogether unknowne to his Ancestours ; and therefore hee neither craved it, nor in any wise would accept of it. Earles, called in Latine, Comites, are ranged in the third place, and may seeme to have come unto us from our Ancestours the Germans: For, they in times past, as Cor∣nelius Tacitus writeth, had their Comites, Who should alwaies give attendance upon their Princes, and bee at hand in matters of counsell and authoritie. But others thinke, that they came from the Romans to us, as also to the Franks, or French. For, the Empe∣rours, when as the Empire was growne now to the full strength, began to have about them a certaine privie Counsell, which was called Caesaris Comitatus: and then those whose counsell they used in warre and peace, were termed Comites: whence it is that in ancient Inscriptions, wee find oftentimes COMITI IMPP. And in few yeares the name of Comes, grew so rife, that it was given to all Officers and Magistrates that observed or gave attendance upon the said sacred or privie Counsel, or that came out of it: and from hence afterward the name extended to all those which were the Pro∣vosts or Over-seers of any matters of state. In paratitlis ad Codicem. And Suidas defineth Comes, to be The ruler of the people, as Cuiacius hath taught us: who also teacheth us, that before Constantine the Great, the name of Comes was not in use, to signifie any honour. But he, when he altered the forme of the Roman Empire by new distinctions, and endevored to oblige many unto him with his benefits, and them to advance unto honour, ordained first the title of Comes without any function or government at all, to be a title of dignitie: and this Comes had a certaine power and priviledge, for to accompanie the Prince, not on∣ly when hee went abroad, but in his palace also, in his privie chamber, and secret roomes, to have libertie likewise to be present at his Table, and private speeches. And hereupon it is, that wee read thus in Epiphanius, , that is, Who so obtained of the King, the Dignitie of Comites. At length, to them which were beholden unto him for this honourable preferment, hee granted other dignities with charge: and againe, upon those that were in place of Magistracie, and executed any office of State, either at home or abroad, he bestowed that title of honour, Comes Domesticorum, L. Great Master of the Houshold; Comes sacrarum largitionum, L. High Treasurer; Comes sacrae vestis, Master of the Wardrobe; Comes Stabuli, Master of the Horse; Comes Thesauri, Treasurer; Comes Orientis, Lieutenant of the East; Comes Britanniae, Comes Africae, &c. Herehence it came, that ever since the name of Comes, imported Dignitie, and authoritie, or government, at the first temporarie, afterward for terme of life. Moreover, in processe of time, when the Empire of the Romans became rent into many kingdomes, this title yet was retained: and our English-Saxons, called them in Latine, Comites, and Consules, whom in their owne language, they named , and the very same the Danes termed in their tongue, Eorlas, that is, Honourable, as Ethelward writeth, by which name somewhat mollified, they are called of us at this day, Earles. And verily for a long time, P. Pithaeus in Memorab. Cam∣paniae. they were knowne by this name simply: at length, with addi∣tion also of the place over which they were put in authoritie. Neither as yet descen∣ded this honour to the next heire by inheritance. Where, by the way thus much I note, that the first hereditarie Earles in France, were the Earles of Britaine. But when William of Normandy had made conquest of this Land, and seated himselfe in the absolute government of this Kingdome, Earles began to bee Feudall, Heredita∣rie, and Patrimoniall, that is, By fee, or Tenure by service, by inheritance, and by Lands, who also, as it appeareth in An authen∣ticall record of the Exche∣quer. Doomesday-booke, were simply without any addition at all, named Earles, as Comes Hugo, Comes Alanus, Comes Rogerus; Earle Hugh, Earle Alan, Earle Roger, &c. Afterwards, as wee may see in ancient Charters, Earles were created with the name of a place joyned unto them, and the third pennie of the Shire was assigned unto them. As for example, Mawd the Empresse, daughter and heire to K. Henry the First, created an Earle in these words, as appeareth in the very Char∣ter which I have: I Mawd, daughter of K. Henry, and Ladie of the Englishmen, doe give and grant unto Geffrey de Magnavil for his service, or Maunde∣vil. & to his heires after him by right of inheri∣tance to be Earle of Essex, & to have the third pennie out of the Sheriffs Court, issuing out of all pleas, as an Earle should have through his Countie in all things. And this is the most an∣cient Charter that hitherto I have seen, of an Earles creation, Likewise Henry the Se∣cond, King of England her sonne, created an Earle by these words: Know yee, that wee have made Hugh Bigod, Earle of Norfolk, to wit, of the third pennie of Norwic, and Nor∣folc, as freely as any Earle of England holdeth his Countie. Which words, an old booke of Battaile Abbey expoundeth thus: An usuall and ancient custome it was throughout all England, that the Earles should have the third pennie to themselves of the Provinces, whereof they tooke the name, and were called Earles. Semblably, another booke with∣out name, more plainly: The Shire or Countie hath the name of the Earle or Count, or else contrariwise, the Count of the Countie. And Count or Earle he is, because he receiveth the third part of those things, that accrew or arise, by plea in every Countie or Shire: But all Earles reape not these fruits, but those to whom the King hath granted them by right of inheritance, or in their owne persons. And hereupon Polydore Virgil writeth truly, and according to the manner of our age. It is a custome in England, saith he, that the titles of Earldomes be given at the Princes pleasure, even without possession of those places, from whence the very titles are taken. And therefore the King is wont to give unto them, that pos∣sesse nothing in that Countie, some certaine pension or summe of money out of his owne reve∣nues, in liew of the possession. Earles were created in old time without any complement or ceremonie at all, but onely by delivering unto them a Charter. Vnder Stephen who usurped the king∣dome, during the heat of civill war, many also tooke upon them the titles of Earles, whom the Historie of Waverlew Church, and others of that age calleth Pseudo-Comi∣tes, that is, counterfeit Earles, and Comites imaginarios, that is, Earles in conceit, whiles it reporteth unto us, that Henrie the Second deposed them. And King Iohn, was the first by my observation, Cincture of the sword. that used in creating of them, the cincture of a sword. For Roger of Hoveden writeth thus: King Iohn upon the day of his Coronation girded Wil∣liam Mareschall with the sword of the Earldome of Penbrochiae, in another place. Strigulia, and Geffrey Fitz-Peter with the sword of the Earldome of Essex: who albeit they had beene called Earles before and governed their Shires, yet were they not girt with the sword of an Earldome: and upon that day they waited at the Kings table, wearing those swords by their sides. In the age next ensuing, there came up the imposition of a chaplet cap, with a Circlet of gold, that now is turned into a coronet with raies or points onely, and with a robe of estate. Which three, to wit, a sword with a girdle, a cap or chaplet with a coro∣net, and a mantle or robe of estate, are by three severall Earles borne before him, that is to be created Earle: and betwixt two Earles arraied also in their robes of estate, brought he is in his Surcoat unto the King sitting in his throne, where kneeling downe while the Patent or Charter of his creation is a reading: at these words, This same T. we erect, create, const ute, make, appoint, and ordaine Earle of S. and we give and grant unto him the name, title, state, stile, honour, authority, and dignitie of the Earle S. and in∣to it by the cincture of a sword really doe invest: Then is the robe or mantell of estate done upon him by the King: the sword hung about his neck, the cap with the Coronet put upon his head, and the said Charter of his creation being read before, delivered into his hand. But these matters are beside my purpose. Now, whereas it is growen to bee a custome, that he which is to be created Earle, if he were not a Baron before, should be made a Baron first; it is a new ceremonie come up of late daies, and put in use, since the time of King Henrie the Eight. But among Earles, most honorable are they by many de∣grees, which are called Counts Palatine: For, as this terme Palatine was a name com∣mon to all them that had offices in the Kings palace; Count Pala∣tine. so Count Palatine was a title of dignity conferred upon him that before had beene an Officer Palatine, with a certaine roiall authority to sit in judgment within his owne Territorie. As for the Earle Mar∣shall of England: King Richard the second gave that title first to Thomas Mowbray Earle of Nottingham, whereas before they were simply stiled Marshals of England and after the banishment of Mowbray, he granted to T. Holland Duke of Surrey substituted Earle Marshall in his place, Pithaus. that he should carrie a rodde of gold enamelled blacke at both ends, when as before they used one of wood. After Earles, Vicounts. next follow in order VICECOMITES, whom we call Vicounts: An old name this is of an office, but a new title of dignitie, not heard of with us before Henry the Sixth daies, who conferred that title upon . Lord Beaumont. In the ranke of the superior or chiefe Nobility, Barons. BARONES have the next place. And although I am not ignorant, what the learned doe write of this words signification in Tullie, yet wil∣lingly will I accord to the opinion of Isidore and of an old Grammarian, who will have Barones to signifie, hired souldiers. For, that place in Hirtius so well knowne, touching the warre of Alexandria, seemeth cleerely to prove the same: and this it is. They came running together to defend Cassius; for, hee was wont alwaies to have a∣bout him Barones, and a great many chosen souldiers weaponed, from which the rest are severed apart. Neither dissenteth from this, the old Glossarie with Latin before Greeke, which interpreteth Baro, by that is, a man. And throughout the laws of the Longo∣bards, Baro is used for Vir, that is, a man. And for the Etymologies of this word which some have forged, I like thē not. The French Heralts deduce Barones from the French tongue, as one would say, Par-hommes, that is, men of equall dignitie: our English Lawyers would have them to be as much, as Robora belli, that is, the strength of war, Some Germans say they import, as it were, Banner heires, that is, Lord-bearing Ban∣ners. Isidorus saith, they are so termed, as a man should say, that is, grave or weighty. In Parergis. See Gol∣dastus, pag. 14. Alciatus deriveth them of Berones, an ancient people in Spaine, who were, as he saith, in times past, waged souldiers. But that derivation out of the German tongue is the better, wherin Bar betokeneth Free, and him that is his owne man, and at liber∣tie. When this name first came into this Island I know not for certaine. The Britaines doe not acknowledge it for theirs. In the English Saxon Lawes it is no where to bee seene; nor found in the Saxon Glossarie of Alfricus among the Vocables or termes of honour; where, Dominus is translated Laford, which wee have contracted short into Lord. The Danes called their Free-Lords, such as these Barons be at this day, Thani, and so they terme them still, Lords. as Andreas Velleius witnesseth. Howbeit, in Burgun∣die the use of the name hath beene of great antiquitie: For, Gregorie Turonensis wri∣teth thus, The Barons of Burgundie as well Bishops as other Leudes, &c. In a fragment of the laws of Canatus King of English-men and Danes, About the yeere, 580. was the first mention made of a Baron with us, so far as ever I could hitherto observe: and yet therein, according to the variety of copies we read indifferently these termes, Vironis, Baronis, and Thani. But that a Baron is meant therby, evident it is out of the Lawes of William the Con∣querour, into which those ordinances of Canutus are in the Normans tongue transla∣ted under the name of Baro: and loe what the very words are: Exercitualia verò, &c. That is, Let the Heriots or Relevies be so moderate, as that they may bee tolerable. Of an Earle, N riots or Re∣levies. as decent it is, eight horses, foure with saddles, and foure without saddles: foure Hel∣mets, and foure shirts of male: eight launces or speares, and as many shields, foure swords, and withall 200. mauces of gold. Of a Viron or Baron to the King, who is next unto him, foure horses, two with saddles, and two without saddles, two swords, foure speares and as ma∣ny targets, Haply, Man∣cusae, that is, 30. deniers. one helmet, and one coate of mauile, and with fifty mauces of gold. Also in the first time of the Normans, Valvasores and Thani were ranged in degree of honour, next after Earles and Barons: and the Valvasores of the better sort, if wee may beleeve those that write de Feudis, Many Thanes in England, in the Con∣querours time. were the very same that now Barons are. So that the name [ Baro ] may seeme to bee one of those, which time, by little and little hath mollified and made of better esteeme. Neither was it as yet a terme of great honor. For, in those daies some Earles had their Barons under them: and I remember that I read in the ancient Constitutions and ordinances of the Frenchmen, how there were under an Earle, twelve Barons, and as many Capitaines under a Baron. And certaine it is, that there be ancient Charters extant, in which Earles, since the comming in of the Normans wrote thus, To all my Barons as well French as English, Greeting, &c. Yea even Citizens of better note were called Barons. For, the Citizens of Warwick, in Doomesday book, were named Barones: likewise, Citizens of London; and the Inhabitants of the Cinque-ports enjoyed the same name. But, some few yeares after, like as at Rome in times past, they chose Senators for their worth in wealth: so were they with us counted Barons, who held lands of their own by a whole Baronie: that is, 13. Knights Fees, and a third part of one Knights Fee: reckoning every fee, as an old book witnesseth, at 20. li. which make in all 400. marks. For, that was the value of one entire Baronie: and they that had lands and revenues to this worth, were wont to be summoned unto the Parliament. And it seemed to bee a dignitie with a ju∣risdiction: which the Court Barons, Court-Barons. as they terme them, in some sort doe prove: yea and the very multitude that was of these Barons perswaded me, to thinke them to be Lords of this nature, as that they might in some sort minister and execute justice within their circuit and seigniorie, such as the Germans call Free-heires, and especially, if they had Castles of their owne. For then, they Jumped Just with the definition of that most famous Civilian Baldus, who defineth him to be a Baron, whosoever had a meere and subordinate rule in some castle, by the grant of the Prince. And all they, as some would have it, that held Baronies, seeme to have claimed unto themselves this ho∣nor: so that, Math. Paris. pag. 1262. as divers learned in our lawes are of opinion, a Baron and a Baronie, a Count or Earle and a Countie, a Duke and a Dutchie, were Conjugata: that is, termes as one would say, yoked together. Certes, in those daies, Henrie the Third reckoned in England 150. Baronies. And hereupon it is, that in all the Charters and Histories of that age, all noble men in manner be called Barons: and verily that title then was right honorable, and under the terme of Baronage, all the superiour states of the king∣dome, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earles and Barons, in some sort were comprised. But it attained to the highest pitch of honor, Baronage of England. ever since that King Henrie the Third, out of so great a number, which was seditious and turbulent, called the very best, by writ or summon, unto the high Court of Parliament. For he (out of a writer I speake of good antiquity) after many troubles and enormous vexations, betweene the King himselfe, & Si∣mon of Mont-fort with other Barons raised, & after appeased, did decree and ordaine, that all those Earles and Barons of the Realme of England, unto whom the King himselfe vouchsa∣fed to direct his writs of Summons, should come unto his Parliament, and none others. But- that which he began a little before his death, Edward the First and his successour, constantly observed, and continued. Hereupon, they onely were accounted Barons of the kingdom, whom the Kings had cited by vertue of such writs of Summons, as they terme them, unto the Parliament. And it is noted, that the said prudent King Ed∣ward the First, summoned alwaies those of ancient families that were most wise to his- Parliaments, but omitted their sonnes after their death, if they were not answerable to their parents in understanding. Barons were not created by Patent untill such time as King Richard the Second created Iohn Beauchamp de Holt Baron of Kiderminster by his letters Patent, bearing date the eighth day of October, in the eleventh yeare, of his raigne. Since that time, the Kings by their Pat ents, and the putting on of the mantle or roabe of honour, have given this honour. And at this day, this order of creating a Baron by letters Patent, as also that other by writs of Summons, are in use: in which notwithstanding they are not stiled by the name of Baron, but of Chevalier ; for the Common law doth not acknowledge Baron to be a name of dignity. And they that be in this wise created, are called Barons of the Parliament, Barons of the Realme, and Barons of honor, for difference of them, who yet according to that old forme of Ba∣rons, be commonly called Barons, as those of Burford, of Walton ; and those who were Barons unto the Count-Palatines of Chester and Pembroch, who were Barons in fee and by tenure. These our Parliamentarie Barons carie not the bare name onely, as those of France and Germanie, but be all borne Peeres of the Realme of England, Nobles, Great States and Counsellors: and called they are by the King in these words▪ To treat of the high af∣faires of the kingdome, and thereof to give their counsell. They have also immunities and priviledges of their owne, namely that in criminall causes they are not to have their triall but by a Iurie of their Peeres: that they be not put to their oath, but their pro∣testation upon their Honor is sufficient: that they be not empanelled upon a Iurie of twelve men for enquest de facto. No supplicavit can be granted against them. A Capias cannot be sued out against them: Neither doth an Essoine lie against them: with very many other, Bishops, Ba∣rons. Abbats, Ba∣rons of the Parliament. which I leave unto Lawyers, who are to handle these and such like. Be∣sides these, the two Archbishops, and all the Bishops of England, be Barons also of the kingdome, and Parliament: even as in our Grandfathers daies, these Abbats and Priors following: The Abbat of Glastenburie. The Abbat of S. Augustines in Canterbury. The Abbat of S. Peter in Westminster. The Abbat of S. Albans. The Abbat of S. Edmonds-Bury. The Abbat of Peterburgh. The Abbat of S. Iohn of Colchester. The Abbat of Evesham. The Abbat of Winchelcomb. The Abbat of Crouland. The Abbat of Battaile. The Abbat of Reding. The Abbat of Abindon. The Abbat of Waltham holy Crosse. The Abbat of Shrewsburie or Salop. The Abbat of Sircester. The Abbat of S. Peters in Glocester. The Abbat of Bardeney. The Abbat of S. Bennets of Hulme. The Abbat of Thorney. The Abbat of Ramsey. The Abbat of Hyde. The Abbat of Malmesburie. The Abbat of S. Marie in Yorke. The Abbat of Selbey. The Prior of Coventrie. The Prior of The order of S. Iohn at Ierusalem, who commonly is called Master of S. Iohns Knights, and would be counted the first and chiefe Baron of England. Vnto whom, as still unto the Bishops, By right and custome it appurtained, as to Peeres of the Kingdome, to be with the rest of the Peeres personally present at all parliaments what∣soever, there to consult, to handle, to ordaine, decree, and determine, in regard of the Ba∣ronies which they held of the King. For, William the first, (a thing that the Church∣men of that time complained of, but those in the age ensuing counted their greatest honor) ordained Bishopricks and Abbaies, Matth. Paris. which held Baronies in pure and perpetuall Alm s, and untill that time were free from all secular service, to bee under military or Knights service, enrolling every Bishopricke and Abbay at his will and pleasure, and appoin∣ting how many souldiers he would have every of them to find for him and his successours, in the time of hostility and warre. From that time ever since those Ecclesiasticall persons en∣joyed all the immunities that the Barons of the Kingdome did, save onely that they were not to be judged by their Peeres. For considering that according to the Canons of the Church, such might not be present in matters of life and death: in the same causes they are left unto a jurie of twelve men to be judged, in the question of Fact. But whether this be a cleere point in law or no, I referre me to skilfull Lawyers. Vavasors. Vavasors or Valvasors in old time, stood in the next ranke after Barons: whom the Lawyers derive from Valvae, that is, leaved dootes▪ And this dignitie seemeth to have come unto us from the French: For when they had soveraigne rule in Italy, they called those Valvasores who of a Duke, Marquesse, Earle or Captaine, had received the charge over some part of their people: and as Butelere the civill Lawyer saith, had power to chastise in the highest degree, but not the Libertie of faires and mercates. This was a rare dignity among us, Signius. and if ever there were such long since by little and little, it ceased and ended. For, in Chaucers time it was not great, seeing that of his Franklin a good yeoman or Freeholder, he writeth but thus: A Sheriffe had he beene and a C ntour, Was no where such a worthy Vavasour. Nobles of an inferiour ranke. Knights. Inferiour nobles are Knights, Esquires, and those which usually are called Generosi and Gentlemen. Knights, who of our English Lawyers be termed also in Latin Milites, and in all na∣tions well neere besides, tooke their name of Horses: for the Italians call them Cavel∣lieni, the Frenchmen, Chevaliers, the Germans Reiters, and our Britans in Wales Margogh, all of riding. Englishmen onely terme them Knights▪ by a word that in the old English language, as also of the German, signifieth indifferently a servitor or mi∣nister, and a lusty young man. Heereupon it commeth, that in the Old written Gospels translated into the English tongue, wee read, for Christs Disciples, Christs Leorning Cnyhts, and else where for a Client or Vassall, Incnyght: and Bracton our ancient civill Lawyer maketh mention of Rad nights, that is to say, serving horsemen: who held their lands with this condition, that they should serve their Lords on horsbacke: and so by cutting off a peece of the name, as our delight is to speake short, I thought long since, that this name of Knights remained with us. But whence it came, that our countrey∣men should in penning of lawes, and in all writings since the Normans conquest terme those Knights in Latin, Milites, I can hardly see. And yet I am not ignorant, that in the declining time of the Roman Empire, Wherefore Knights be called in La∣tin Milites. the Denomination of Milites, that is, Souldiers, was transferred unto those that conversing neere about the Princes per∣son bare any of the greater offices in the Princes Court or traine. But if I have any sight at all in this matter, they were among us at first so called, who held any lands or inhe∣ritances, as Tenants in Fee, by this tenure, to serve in the warres, For those Lands were termed Knights Fees: and those that elsewhere they named Feudatarij, that is, Tenants in Fee, were here called Milites, that is, Knights: as for example, Milites Regis &c. The Kings Knights, Knights of the Archbishop of Canterburie, Knights of Earle Roger of Earle Hugh &c. For that they received those lands or manors of them with this condi∣tion to serve for them in the wars, and to yeeld them fealty and homage: whereas o∣thers who served for pay were simply called Solidarij and Servientes, Solidarij. that is, Souldiers and Servitors. But these, call them Milites or Equites, whether you will, are with us of foure distinct sorts: The most honorable and of greatest dignitie be those of the Order of S. George, or of the Garter: In a second degree are Banerets: in a third ranke, Knights of the Bath: and in a fourth place, those who simply in our tongue, be called Knights, in Latin Equites aurati, or Milites, without any condition at all. Of S. Georges Knights, I will write in due place, when I am come to Windsor. Of the rest thus much briefly at this time. Banerets, whom others terme untruely Baronets, have their name of a Banner: For, Banerets. granted it was unto them in regard of their martiall vertue and prowesse, to use a foure square ensigne or Banner, as well as Barons: whereupon some call them and that truly Equites Vexillarij, that is, Knights-Banerets, and the Germans, Banner-heires. The antiquitie of these Knights Banerets, I cannot fetch from before the time of King Edward the Third, when Englishmen were renowned for Chivalrie: so that I would beleeve verily, that this honorable title was devised then first, in recompence of martiall prowesse, untill time shall bring more certainty of truth to light. In the publicke records of that time, mention is made among military titles, of Banerets, of Fars. 2. Pat. 15.8.3. m. 22. and 23. Men at the Banner, (which may seeme all one) and of Men at armes. And I have seene a Charter of King Edward the Third, by which he advanced Iohn Coupland to the State of a Baneret, because in a battell fought at Durham hee had taken prisoner David the Second, Hominum ad vexillum. King of the Scots ; and it runneth in these words: Being willing to re∣ward the said Iohn, Hominum ad arma. who tooke David de Bruis prisoner, and frankly delivered him unto us; for the deserts of his honest and valiant service, in such sort as others may take example by this president to doe us faithfull service in time to come; we have promoted the said Iohn to the place and degree of a Baneret: and for the maintenance of the same state, we have gran∣ted for us and our heires to the same Iohn, five hundred pounde by the yeere, to bee received for him and his heires, &c. Worth the remembrance it is, to set downe heere out of Froissard the very maner and forme, whereby Iohn Chandos a brave & noble warrior in his time was made a Baneret. What time as Edward Prince of Wales, saith he, was to fight a field in the behalfe of Peter King of Castile against Henry the Bastard and the Frenchmen, Iohn Chandos came unto the Prince and delivered into his hands his own Banner folded and rolled up, with these words: My Lord, this is my Banner, may it please you to unfold and display it, that I may advance it into the field this day. For, I have by Gods favour revenewes sufficient thereunto. The Prince then, and Peter King of Castile who stood hard by, tooke the Banner into their hands, unfolding the same, delivered it again unto him with these or such like words: Sir Iohn, in the name of God, who blesse this dayes service of yours, that it may speed well and turne to your glorie, Beare your selfe manfully, and give proofe what a Knight you are. Having thus received the Banner, to his companies he went with a cheerefull heart: My fel∣low souldiers, quoth he, Behold there is my Banner and yours, in case yee defend it courageously as your owne. Of later time, he that is to be advanced unto this dig∣nity, either before the battell, that hee may bee encouraged; or after the battell en∣ded, that hee may receive due honor for his valour, bearing an ensigne of a long fashion, such as they call a Pennon wherein his owne armes are depainted in their colours, is brought betweene two elderly Knights, with trumpeters and Heralds going before, into the presence of the King, or his Regent and Lieutenant generall: who after good words and wishes imparting happie fortune, commandeth the tip or point of the said pennon to bee cut off, that of a long pennon it might bee made a foure square banner. Concerning Knights of the Bath, in all my readings hitherto, I could find no greater Antiquitie thereof, Knights of the Bathe. than this, that they were in use among the ancient French: and that Henrie the Fourth King of England, that day whereon hee was crowned in the Tower of London, dubbed 46. Esquiers Knights, who the night before had watched and bathed: unto every one of whom, hee gave greene side coats reaching downe to their ankles, with streit sleeves, and furred with minivere: also, they they wore upon their left shoulder two cordons of white silke with tassels thereto hanging downe. These in former times were wont to be created, and selected out of the flower of Nobilitie (which had not before taken the degree of Knighthood) at the coro∣nation of Kings and Queenes, and at their marriages: sometimes also, when their sonnes were invested Princes of Wales, or Dukes, or when they solemnly received the cincture or militarie girdle of Knighthood, and that with many ceremonies, which now for the most part are grown out of use. But in our daies, they that are called by the King to enter into this order (neither will I handle this argument exquisitly) the day before they are created, being clad in an Eremits gray weed, with a hood, a linnen coife, and booted withall, come devoutly to divine service, to begin their warfare there, as if they would employ their service for God especially: they suppe all toge∣ther: and upon every one of them, there wait two Esquiers, and one Page: After supper, they retire themselves into their bed-chamber, where for each of them is pre∣pared a prettie bed, with red curtains, and their owne armes fastened thereupon, with a bathing vessell standing close by, covered with linnen clothes, wherein after they have said their praiers, and commended themselves to God, they bathe them∣selves, that thereby they might bee put in mind, to be pure in bodie and soule from thenceforth. The next morrow, early in the morning awakened they are, and rai∣sed with a noyse of Musicall Instruments, and doe on the same apparell. Then the high Constable of England, the Earle Marshall, and others whom the King appoin∣teth, come unto them, call them forth in order: and tender an oath unto them, namely, that they shall serve and worship God above all, defend the Church, honour the King, maintaine his rights, protect widowes, virgins, orphans, and to their power repell and put by all wrong. When they have sworne thus to doe, by laying their hand upon the Gospels, they are brought with state to morning prayer, the kings Musitians and Heralds going before, and by them likewise, they are conducted backe to their bed-chambers: where after they have devested themselves from their Eremites weed, they put on a mantle of martiall redde Taffata, implying they should bee Martiall men, and a white Hat with a white plume of feathers over their linnen coife, in to∣ken of sincerity; and tie a paire of white gloves to the pendant cordon of their man∣tle. This done, they mount upon Steedes, dight with sadle and furniture of blacke leather, with white intermingled, and having a crosse in the frontlet. Before every one of them rideth his owne Page, carrying a sword with a gilded hilt, at which there hang gilt spurres, and of either hand of them ride their Esquiers. With this pompe, and trumptes sounding before them, to the Kings Court they goe, where when they are brought by two ancient Esquiers to the Kings presence, the Page delivereth the Girdle and Sword hanging thereto, unto the Lord Chamberlaine, and he with great reverence unto the King, who therewith girdeth the Knight overthwart, and comman∣deth therewith two elder Knights to put on the Spurres, who in times past were wont with good wishes, and praiers to kisse his knees that was to bee Knighted. And these new Knights thus created, used in old time to bring up the service of meates to the Kings Table: after this, they dine altogether, sitting to one side of the boord, every one under the Escutcheon of his owne Armes fastened over his head. At evening praier they repaire to the chapel, offer their swords upon the high altar, and by laying downe a piece of money redeeme the same againe. Now, as they returne from divine service, the Kings Master-Cooke sheweth them his knife, and admonisheth them to performe the part of good and faithfull Knights, otherwise he would to their shame and reproch, cut off those Spurres of theirs. Upon the Coronation day, in that so∣lemne pompe, they accompanie the King keeping their places, with their Swords girt to them, and their spurres on, in Joviall blew mantles, as a man would say, in the colour of just Jupiter, as a fore-token of justice, having the knot of white silke made in forme of a crosse, with an hood upon their left shoulder. But of these comple∣ments (which my purpose was not to prosecute in particular) this may bee thought sufficient, if not superfluous. Now as touching those Knights, who simply without any addition bee called, Knights, Knights. and howsoever they are in order ranged last, yet by institution they be first, and of greatest Antiquitie. For, as the Romans, a gowned nation, gave unto them that were entring into mans estate, a virile and plaine gowne, without welt or gard: even so, the Germans our Ancestors bestowed upon their young men, whom they judged meet for to manage armes, armour, and weapons. Which Cornelius Ta∣citus will informe you of, in these words of his: The manner was not for any one to take armes in hand, De moribus Germanorum. before the State allowed him as sufficient for Martiall service. And then, in the very assembly of Counsell, either some one of the Princes, or the father of the young man, or one of his kinsfolke furnish him with a shield and a javelin. This with them stan∣deth in stead of a virile gowne, this is the first honour done to youth: before this they seeme to bee but part of a private house, but now within a while members of the Common∣weale. And seeing that such military young men, they termed in their language (as we in ours) Knechts, from them I deeme, the originall both of name and institution also, ought to be fetched. This was the first, and most simple manner of creating a Knight, this the Lombards, this the Frankes, this our countrymen, all descended out of Ger∣manie in old time used. Lib. 1. cap. 22. Paulus Diaconus reporteth thus; among the Lombards, This is the Custome, that the Kings sonne dineth not with his father, unlesse hee receive Armes before from some King of a forraine nation. The Annals of France record, that the Kings of the Franks, gave armes unto their sonnes, and to others, and girded them with a sword: yea, and our Aelfred, as William of Malmesburie witnesseth, when he dubbed Athelstan his nephew, Knight, being a child of great hope, gave him a scar∣let mantle, a belt or girdle set with precious stones, and a Saxon-sword with a golden scabberd. Afterwards, when as religion had possessed mens minds so, as that they thought nothing well & fortunately done, but what came from Church-men, our An∣cestors a little before the Normans comming received the Sword at their hands. And this, Ingulphus who lived in those daies, sheweth in these words; He that was to be cōse∣crated unto lawfull warfare, should the evening before, with a contrite heart, make confes∣sion of his sinnes unto the Bishop, Abbat, Monke, or Priest, and being absolved, give him∣selfe to prayer, and lodge all night in the Church, and when hee was to heare divine service the morrow after, offer his sword upon the Altar: and after the Gospel, the Priest was to pu the sword first hallowed upon the Knights neck, with his Benediction, and so when hee had heard Masse againe, and received the Sacrament, he became a lawfull Knight. Neither grew this custome out of use streight waies under the Normans: For, John of Saris∣burie writeth in his Polycraticon, thus; A solemne Custome was taken up and used, that the very day when any one was to be honoured with the girdle of knighthood, hee should so∣lemnly goe to Church, and by laying and offering his Sword upon the Altar, vow himselfe (as it were) by making a solemne profession, to the service of the Altar, that is to say, promise perpetuall service, and obsequious dutie unto the Lord. Peter also of Blois, writeth thus: At this day young Knights, Epist. 94. and souldiers receive their Swords from the Altar, that they might professe themselves Sonnes of the Church, and to have taken the Sword for defence of the poore, for punishment and revenge of malefactors, and delivery of their Country. But in processe of time (saith he) it is turned cleane contrary. For, in these daies since they are become adorned with the Knights cincture, presently they arise against the Annointed of the Lord, and rage upon the patrimonie of Christ crucified. And as for this ceremonie, that they would be girt with a Sword, it may seeme no doubt to have proceeded from the militarie discipline of the Romans; because as they denied it unlawfull to fight with their enemie before they were bound to their militarie oath, by a drawn sword: even so, our Forefathers thought they might not go to warfare lawfully, before they were by this ceremonie lawfully authorised: according to which wee reade, that William Rufus King of England, was dubbed Knight, by Lanfranke the Archbishop. But this custome by little and little grew to disuse, since the time that the Normans, as Ingul∣phus writeth, laughed and scorned at it; and in a Synode at Westminster, An. 1102. a Canon passed, That no Abbats should dubbe Knights: which some notwithstanding expound thus, That Abbats should grant no lands of the Church to be held, by Knights ser∣vice, or in Knights fee, or service. Afterwards, Kings were wont to send their sonnes unto the neighbour Princes to receive Knighthood at their hands: thus, was our K. Henrie the Second, sent unto David King of the Scots, and Malcolme King of Scots unto our Henry the Second, and our Edward the first unto the King of Castile, to take of them Militarie or Virile armes: for, these termes and phrases they used in that age for the creation of a Knight. Then it was also, that besides the sword and girdle, gilt spurres were added for more ornament; whereupon at this day, they are called in Latin, Equites aurati. Moreover, they had the priviledge to weare & use a signet: for before they were dubbed knights, (as I gather out of Abendon Booke) it was not lawfull to use a seale: Which writing (quoth he) Richard Earle of Chester purposed to signe with the seale of his mother Ermen∣trud, considering that all Letters which he directed (for as yet he had not Beene dub∣bed Knight. taken the Mili∣tarie girdle) were made up and closed within his mothers signet. In the age ensuing, knights (as it may be well collected) were made by their wealth, and state of living: For, they which had a great knights Fee, that is, (if wee may beleeve old records) Others say 100. 680. akers of land, claimed as their right, the ornaments and badges of knighthood: Nay rather under Henry the Third, they were compelled after a sort to be knights, as many as in revenues of their lands might dispend fifteen pounds by the yeare: so as now it seemed a title of burden, rather than of honour. In the yeare 1256. there went out an edict from the King, by vertue whereof, commandement was given, & proclamation made throughout the Realme, that whosoever had fifteen pounds in land and above, should be dight in his armes, and endowed with knighthood: to the end that England as well as Italie might be strengthned with Chivalrie: and they that would not, or were not able to maintaine the honour of knighthood, should fine for it, and pay a piece of money. Hence it is, that in the Kings Records, we meet so often with this: For respit of Knighthood, A. de N.I.H. &c. Also such like presentments from the Jurors, or sworne Enquest, as this R. de S. Law∣rence holdeth an entire and whole Fee, is at full age, and not yet Knight, therefore in Misericordia, that is, To be fined at the Kings pleasure. To this time and after, unlesse I faile in mine observation, in the Briefes and Instruments our law when twelve men, or Jurers are named, before whom there passeth triall or proofe de facto, that is, of a fact, they bee called, Milites, that is, Knights, who have a compleat Fee, and those Milites gladio cincti, that is, Knights with cincture of sword, who by the King are girded with the belt of knighthood. At which time when the King was to create knights, as the said Matthew Paris writeth, he sat gloriously in his seate of estate, arraied in cloth of gold of the most precious and costly Bawdkin, and crowned with his Crowne of gold, and to every Knight he allowed or gave 100. shillings, for his Comple∣ments. harnessements. And not only the King, but also Earles in those daies created Knights. For the same author reporteth, How the Earle of Glocester invested with a militarie girdle his brother William, after he had proclaimed a Turneament. Simon likewise de Montefort Earle of Leicester, did the same by Gilbert de Clare: Like as in France, (a thing that evidently appeareth by the Patent or Instrument of Ennoblish∣ment. Nobilitation) he that hath obtained such letters of Nobilitatio∣nis. Ennoblishment, is enabled to be dubbed Knight, and receive the girdle of knight∣hood at any Knights hand that he will himselfe. But since that time, hath no man with us beene created Knight, but either by the King himselfe, or the Kings eldest sonne, warranted before by authoritie received from his father, or else by the Kings Lieute∣nant, or Deputie Generall in the Campe, and that in consideration either of some va∣liant acts atchieved, or exploits to be performed abroad in armes: or else of wisedome and policie at home. And verily a most prudent and wise order was this, that our Kings tooke, since they had not any Fees or Lands now to bestow upon them. Nei∣ther was their (I assure you) any thing of more validitie, to give an edge unto the courage of hardy men, and to bind unto them their best subjects, and such as had deserved well, (being otherwise worshipfully descended, and of honourable paren∣tage, and withall sufficient for estate and living) than kindly and lovingly to adorne them with this high esteemed title of Knighthood, which was before time the name only of charge and function: when this right worshipfull title was by the Prince con∣ferred upon one, advisedly and for desert, it went (no doubt) for an ample reward, was prized as a benefit, and accounted among the tokens of honour. For, Knights in this manner dubbed, made this esteeme thereof, that in it consisted the guerdon of their vertue and valour, the praise of their house and family, the memoriall of their stocke and linage; and lastly, the glory of their name. Insomuch, as our Lawyers have in their bookes writen, That [Knight] was a name of dignitie, but so was not Baron. For in old time a Baron (if he were not of this order of Knighthood) was written simply by his Christian, or fore-name, and the proper name of his family, without any addition, unlesse it were of Dominus, a terme fitting Knights also. And this name of Knight may seeme to have beene an honourable additament to the highest dignitie, when Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, and Barons, requested to have the dignitie, and name together. Heere it likes me well to insert, what Mat∣thew Florilegus hath written concerning the creation of Knights in the time of Ed∣ward the First. The King (quoth he) for to augment and make a goodly shew of his expedi∣tion into Scotland, caused publike proclamation to be made throughout England, that who∣soever were to be Knights by hereditarie succession, and had wherewith to maintaine that degree, should present themselves in Westminster, at the feast of Whitsontide, there to re∣ceive every one, the ornaments of a Knight, (saving the equipage or furniture that belong∣eth to horses) out of the Kings Wardrobe. When as therefore there flocked thither to the num∣ber of 300. young gallants, the Sons of Earles, Barons, and Knights, purple liveries, fine silke Scarfes, Roabes most richly embroidered with gold, were plentifully bestowed among them, according as was befitting each one: And because the Kings Palace, (large though it were) was streited of roome, for so great a multitude assembled, they cut downe the apple trees a∣bout the new Temple in London, laid the walles along, and there set up pavilions and tents, wherin these noble young gallants might array, and set out themselves one by one in their gor∣geous and golden garments. All the night long also, these foresaid youths, as many as the place would receive watched and prayed in the said Temple. But the Prince of Wales, by commandement from the King his father, held his wake, togither with the principall and goodliest men of this company within the Church of Westminster. Now such sound was there of trumpets, so loud a noise of Minstrelsie, so mightie an applause and cry of those that for joy shouted, that the chaunting of the Covent could not be heard from one side of the Quire to the other. Well, the morrow after, the King dubbed his Sonne Knight, and gave him the Girdle of Knighthood in his owne palace, and therewith bestowed upon him the Du∣chie of Aquitaine. The Prince then, thus created Knight, went directly into West∣minster Church for to grace with the like glorious dignitie his feers and companions. But so great was the prease of people thronging before the High Altar, that two Knights were thronged to death, and very many of them fainted, and were readie to swowne, yea, although every one of them had three souldiers at least to lead and pro∣tect him: The Prince himselfe by reason of the multitude preasing up to him, having divided the people by the meanes of steeds of service, no otherwise than upon the high Altar girt his foresaid companions with the order of knighthood. But in our daies, hee that receiveth the dignitie of a Knight, kneeleth downe, and then the King or Queene. King with his sword drawne, slightly smiteth him upon the shoulder, speaking unto him these words withall, in French, Sois Chevalier au nom de Dieu, that is, Be thou Knight in the name of God: and af∣terwards hee saith moreover, Avances Chevalier, that is, Arise Sir Knight. As for all things else appurtaining to this order, namely, what an excellent and glorious degree this of knighthood was esteemed with our Ancestours, how noble a reward to brave minded men, such as desired glorie and honour, it was reputed, how carefully they kept faith & troth, considering it was sufficient, if they undertook or promised ought as faithfull Knights or upon the faith of a Knight, how far they were from base gaine and lucre, and what manner of paiment or Aid is to be levied for Knights fees, when as the Prince, the Kings eldest son should be invested in this honour, &c. I leave it for others to write: as also, when they had so far offended, that being to suffer death ther∣fore, they were first dispoiled of their ensignes, and of their degree, to wit, their mili∣tarie Girdle ungirted, the Sword taken away, their Spurs cut off with an hatchet, their Gantlets or Gloves plucked from them, and the Escutcheon of their Armes reversed: like as in the degrading Priests. Ecclesiasticall order, all the Ecclesiasticall ornaments, booke, chalice, & such like are taken away. Let the curious also enquire, whether those knights were truly by some termed Knights Bachelars, or whether Bachelars were of a mid∣dle degree between these Knights and Esquires? For, in the Kings Record are read, The names of Knights, In dorso Pat. 51. H. 3. of Bachelars, and of Valects of the Earle of Gocester, and of others. Where∣upon there be that would have Bachelars so called, as one would say, Bas-Chevaliers, that is, knights of low degree: although other derive that name from the French verbe Battailer, which signifieth to combate or fight it out. Withall, let them weigh and consider, whether these dignities of knighthood in times past so glorious, (as long as they were more rare, and bestowed onely as the reward of vertue) may not be vili∣fied, when it becommeth common, and lieth prostitute (as it were) to the ambitious humour of every one. Whereof in the like case Aemilius Probus complained long since among the Romans. Esquires. Next in degree after these Knights, are Esquires, termed in Latine, Armigeri, that is, Costrels, or Bearers of Armes: the same that Scutiferi, that is, Shield-bearers, and Ho∣mines ad arma, that is, Men at Armes: the Goths called them Schilpor, all of carrying the shield: as in old time among the Romans, such as were named Scutarii, who tooke that name either of their Escutcheons of armes, which they bare as Ensignes of their descent, or because they were armour-bearers to Princes, or to the better sort of the Nobilitie. For, in times past every Knight had two of these waighting upon him: they carried his Morrion and shield, as inseparable companions, they stuck close unto him, because of the said Knight their Lord they held certaine lands in Escutage, like as the knight himselfe of the King by knights service. But now a daies, there be five di∣stinct sorts of these: for those whom I have spoken of already, be now no more in a∣ny request. The principall Esquires at this day those are accounted, that are select Esquires for the Princes bodie: the next unto them be knights eldest sonnes, and their eldest sonnes likewise successively. In a third place, are reputed younger sonnes of the eldest sonnes of Barons, and of other Nobles in higher estate: and when such heires male faile, togither with them the title also faileth. In a fourth ranke are rec∣koned those, unto whom the King himselfe, together with a title, giveth armes, or createth Esquires, by putting about their necke a silver colar of Esses. SS. and (in former times) upon their heeles a paire of white spurres silvered: whereupon at this day in the West part of the Kingdome, they be called White-spurres, for distinction from Knights who are wont to weare gilt spurres: and to the first begotten sonnes onely of these doth the title belong. In the fifth and last place bee those ranged, and taken for Esquires, whosoever have any superiour publike office in the Common∣weale, or serve the Prince in any Worshipfull calling. But this name of Esquire, which in ancient time was a name of charge and office onely, crept first among other titles of dignitie and worship, (so farre as ever I could observe,) in the raigne of Ri∣chard the Second. Gentlemen, Gentlemen. or the common sort of Nobilitie bee they, that either are descended of worshipfull parentage, or raised up from the base condition of people, for their vertue or wealth. Citizens or Burgesses, Citizens. be such as in their owne severall citie execute any publike office, and by election have a roome in our High Court of Parliament. Yeomen, Yeomen. are they whom some call, Free-borne, or Free-holders, and our law termeth, Homines Legales, that is, Lawfull men, and who of Free-hands may dispend fortie shil∣lings at least by the yeare. Lastly, Craftsmen, Artisans, or Workemen, be they that labour for hire, and name∣ly, such as sit at worke, Mechanicke Artificers, Smiths, Carpenters, &c. Which were ter∣med of the Romans, Capite censi, as one would say, Taxed or reckoned by the poll, and Proletarii. LAVV COVRTS OF ENGLAND. A S touching the Tribunals, or Courts of Justice of England, there are three sorts of them among us: for, some bee Ecclesiasticall, others Temporall, and one mixt of both, which being the grea∣test, and most honourable of all, is called by a name of no great antiquitie, Parliament. and the same borrowed out of French, The Parlia∣ment. The Anglo-Saxons our ancestours termed it, , that is, An assembly of the wise, and , that is, A Counsell, and , of the Greeke word Synodus, that is, A great Synod or meeting. The Latine writers of that, and the ensuing age called it, Commune Concilium, Curiam altissimam, Generale placitum, Curiam magnam, Magnatum Conventum, Praesen∣tiam Regis, Praelatorum, Procerum{que}, collectorum, Commune totius Regni Concilium, &c. That is, The Common councell, The Highest court, The Generall Plea, The Great court, The meeting of States, The Presence of the King, Prelates and Peeres assembled together, The Publike Councell of the whole Kingdome, &c. And like as the Generall Councell of all Etolia is named by Livie PANAETOLIUM, so this may well be termed PANANGLIUM. For it consisteth of the King, the Clergie, the superior Nobles, the elect Knights and Burgesses; or to speake more significantly after the Lawyers phrase, of the King, the Lords Spirituall, and Temporall, and the Commons, which States represent the bo∣dy of all England. It is not held at set and certaine times, but summoned by the King at his pleasure, so often as consultation is to be had of high affaires and urgent mat∣ters, that the Common weale may sustaine no damage; at his will alone it is dissol∣ved. Now this Court hath soveraigne, and sacred authoritie in making, confirming, repealing, and expounding Lawes, in restoring such as be attainted or outlawed to their former estates, in deciding of the hardest controversies betweene private per∣sons, and, to speake at a word, in all causes which may concerne either the safetie of the State, or any private person whatsoever. The next Court after this, The Kings Court. in the daies presently following the Normans comming, and some good while after, was, The Court of the King himselfe ; and the same kept in the Kings house or Palace, & accompanying the King whither so ever he retired or went in progresse. For, in the Kings Palace, a place there was for the Chancellor and clerks, such as were imployed about writs or processes, and the seale: for Judges also that han∣dled as well Pleas (as they terme them) pertaining unto the Kings Crown, as between one Subject and another. There was also the Exchequer, wherein the Lord Treasurer, Auditours, and Receivers sat, who had the charge of the Kings revenues, treasure, and coffers. Every of these being counted of the Kings houshold in ordinary, had allowed them from the King, both dier, and apparell. Whereupon Gotzelinus in the life of S. Edward, calleth them, The Lawyers of the Palace, & John of Salisburie, The Court Law∣yers. But beside these and above them all, was one appointed for administration of Ju∣stice, named, Iustitia Angliae, The Iustice of England; Prima Iustitia, The principall Iustice; The Iusticer of England, and chiefe Iusticer of England, who, with a yearely pension of a thousand Marks, was ordained by a Commission or Charter running in these termes; The King, to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earles, Barons, Sheriffes, Forre∣sters, and all other liege and faithfull people of England, greeting. Whereas for the pre∣servation of our selves, and the peace of our Kingdome, and for the ministring of Iustice, to all and every person of our Realme, we have ordained our beloved and trustie Philip Basset, Chiefe Iusticer of England, so long as it shall please us; wee charge you upon the faith and al∣legiance that yee owe unto us, and doe straightly enjoyne you, that in all things which concerne the office of our foresaid Iusticeship, and the preservation of our peace, and Kingdome, yee be fully attendant, and assistant unto him, so long as be shall continue in the said Office. Witnesse the King, &c. But when as in the raigne of Henry the Third, enacted it was that the Common Pleas of the Subjects should not follow the Kings Court, but be held in some certain place: within a while after, the Chancerie and the Court of the Pleas of the Crowne, together with the Exchequer, were translated from the Kings Court, and established in certaine places apart by themselves: as some, I know not how truely, have re∣ported. Having premised by way of Preface thus much, I will proceede to write briefly somewhat of these Courts, and others that arise from them, according as they are kept at this day. And whereas some of them bee Courts of Law, to wit; the Kings Bench, The common Bench or Pleas, the Exchequer, the Assises, the Star-Chamber, the Court of Wards, and the Admirals Court: others of Equitie, namely; The Chauncerie, the Court of Requests, The Counsels in the Marches of Wales, and in the North parts; of every of these in due order, somewhat, as I have learned of o∣thers. Kings Bench. The Kings Bench, so called because the Kings were wont there to sit as Presidents in proper person, handleth the pleas of the Crowne, and many other matters which pertaine to the King, and the Weale publique: and withall it sifteth and examineth the errors of the Common Pleas. The Judges there, beside the King when it pleaseth him to be present, are, the Lord chiefe Justice of England, and other Justices foure, or more, as the King shall thinke good. Common Pleas. The common Pleas hath that name because in it are debated the common Pleas betweene Subject and Subject, according to our law, which they call common. Heerein give judgement, The chiefe Iustice of the common Pleas, with foure Justices assistants or more. Officers attendant there be, The Keeper of the Brieffes or writs, Three Protonotaries, and inferiour Ministers very many. Exchequer. The Exchequer tooke that name of a boord or table whereat they sat. For, thus writeth Gervase of Tilburie, who lived in the yeere 1160. The Exchequer is a foure cornered boord, about ten foote long, and five foote broad, fitted in manner of a table for men to sit round about it. On every side a standing ledge or border it hath of the bredth of foure fingers. Vpon this Exchequer boord is laid a cloth bought in Easter terme, and the same of black colour, and rewed with strikes distant one from another a foote or a span. And a little after. This Court, by report, began from the very Conquest of the Realme, and was erected by King William: howbeit the reason and proportion thereof, taken from the Ex∣chequer beyond Sea. In this are all causes heard which belong unto the Kings treasury. Judges therein, be The Lord Treasurer of England, The Chancellor of the Exchequer, The Lord chiefe Baron, with three or foure other Barons of the Exchequer. The servitours and Ministers to this Court are, The Kings Remembrancer, The Lord Treasurers Re∣membrancer, The Clerke of the Pipe, The Controller of the Pipe: Auditours of the old revenues five: The Forrein Opposer, The Clerke of the Estreights, The Clerke of the Pleas, The Mareschall, The Clerke of the Summons, The Deputie Chamberlaines Secondaries in the office of the Kings Remembrancer two, Secondaries in the office of the Lord Treasurers Re∣membrancer two, Secondaries of the Pipe two, Clerkes in divers offices foure, &c. In the other part of the Exchequer called the Receipt, these bee the Officers: Two Chamber∣lains, a vice Treasurer, Clerke of the Tallies, Clerke of the Pels, Tellers foure, Ioyners of Tallies two, Deputie Chamberlaines two: The Clerke for Tallies, The Keeper of the Treasu∣rie, Messengers or Pursevants ordinarie foure: Scribes two, &c. The Officers likewise of the Tenths and first Fruits belong to this Court, who were ordained, when as the Popes autho∣ritie was banished and abolished, and an act passed, by which it was provided that the Tenths, and First fruits of Churchmens Benefices should be paid unto the King. Beside these three Kings Courts for law, Iustices Itine∣rant. to cut off delaies, to ease the subject also of travell and charges; King Henrie the Second sent some of these Judges and others yearely into every Shire or Countie of the Realme, who were called Iustices Itinerant, and commonly Iustices in Eyre. These determined and gave judge∣ment, as well of the Pleas of the Crowne, as the Common Pleas, within those Coun∣ties whereunto they were assigned. For, the said King, as Matthew Paris saith, By the counsell of his sonne and the Bishops together, appointed Iustices to sixe parts of the King∣dome: in every part three, who should sweare to keepe and maintaine the right belonging to every man, sincerely and uncorruptly. But this ordinance vanished at length under Ed∣ward the Third: Howbeit, within a while after by Parliamentary authoritie, it was in some sort revived. For the Counties being divided into certaine Circuits, as wee terme them, two of the Kings Justices together twice in the yeare ride about and keepe their Circuits, for to give definitive sentence of the Prisoners, and as we use to speake, to deliver the Goales or Prisons. Whereupon in our Lawyers Latin, they bee called Iusticiarii Gaolae deliberandae, that is, Justices for Goale deliverie: as also to take Recognisances of Assises of new Deseisine, &c. whereof they be named Iustices of the Assises, to end and dispatch controversies depending, and growne to an issue in the foresaid principall Kings Courts, betweene plaintiffes and defendants, and that, by their Peeres, as the custome is: whence they are commonly called Iustices of Nisi prius, which name they tooke of the writs sent unto the Sheriffe, which have in them these two words, Nisi Prius, that is, Vnlesse before, &c. The Star-Chamber or the Court rather of Kings Counsell, Star-Chambe wherein are discussed and handled criminall matters, perjuries, cousenages, fraud, deceit, riots or excesse, &c. This Court in regard of time is right ancient, and for dignitie most honourable. For it seemes that it may claime antiquitie ever since the first time that Subject ap∣pealed unto their Soveraignes, and the Kings Councell was erected. Now, the Judges of this Court are persons right Honourable, and of greatest reputation, even the Kings Privie Counsellors. As for the name of Star-Chamber, it tooke it from the time that this Counsell was appointed at Westminster in a Chamber there anciently gar∣nished, and beautified with Starres: For we read in the Records of Edward the Third, Counseil en la Chambre des Estoilles, pres de la Receipt al Westminster, that is The Counsell in the Chamber of Starres, neere unto the Receit at Westminster. But the Authoritie thereof, that most sage and wise Prince Henry the Seventh, by authoritie of Parlia∣ment so augmented and established, that some are of opinion, though untruely, hee was the first founder of it. The Judges heere, are The Lord Chancellor of England, The Lord Treasurer of England, The Lord President of the Kings Counsell, The Lord Kee∣per of the Privy Seale, and all Counselors of the State, as wel Ecclesiasticall as Tempo∣rall: and out of the Barons of the Parliament, those whom the King will call: The two chiefe Iustices of the Benches, or in their absence two other Iudges. The Officers heerein are these, The Clerke of the Counsell, The Clerke of writs and processe of the Coun∣sell in the Star-Chamber, &c. And causes here are debated and decided not by Peeres according to our common Law, but after the course of Civill Law. The Court of Wards and Liveries hath the name of Pupils or Wards, Court of whose causes it handleth; was first instituted by Henrie the Eighth; whereas in former times their causes were heard in the Chancerie and Exchequer. For, by an old Ordinance derived out of Normandie, and not from Henry the Third (as some doe write) when a man is deceased, Who holdeth possessions or Lands of the King in chiefe by Knights service, as well the heire as his whole patrimonie and revenues are in the Kings power, tuition, and protection, untill he be full one and twentie yeares of age, and untill by vertue of the Kings briefe or letter, restitution and re-delivery be made unto him thereof. In this Court, the Generall Master sitteth as Judge: under whom are these, The Supra∣visor, or Surveior of Liveries, The Atturney generall of the Court, The generall Recei∣ver, The Auditour, The Clerke of the Liveries, The Clerke of the Court, Fortie Fedaries, and a Messenger. There have sprung up also in these later times, two other Courts, to wit, Of refor∣ming Errours: whereof the first is, to correct Errours in the Exchequer, the other to a∣mend errours committed in the Kings Bench. The Judges in the former of these twaine, are the Lord Chancellor, and Lord Treasurer of England, with others of the Kings Justices whom they are disposed to take unto them. In the later, The Iustices of the Common Pleas, and the Barons of the Exchequer. Admirals Court. The Admirals Court handleth Sea matters. In this are reckoned the Lord Admirall of England, his Lieutenant, and a Iudge: two Scribes, a Serjeant of the Court, and the Vice-Admirals of England. Now proceede we to the Courts of Equitie. Chancerie. The Chancerie drew that name from a Chancellor: which name under the ancient Roman Emperours, was not of so greate esteeme and dignitie, as wee learne out of Vopiscus. But now adaies a name it is of highest honour, and Chancellors are advanced to the highest pitch of civill Dignitie. Whose name Cassiodorus fetcheth from crosse grates or lattesses, because they examined matters, within Socratum. that is, the place of Judgement. Epist. 6. lib. 11. places severed apart en∣closed with partitions of such crosse bars which the Latins call Cancelli. Regard, saith hee to a Chancellor what name you beare: It cannot bee hidden which you doe within Lattesses. For you keepe your gates lightsome; your barres open, and your dores transparent as windows. Whereby, it is very evident, that he sate within grates, where he was to be seene on every side, and thereof it may be thought he tooke that name. But, conside∣ring it was his part, being as it were the Princes mouth, eie, and eare, to strike and dash out with crosse-lines lattise like, those letters, Commissions, Warrants, and Decrees passed against law and right, or prejudiciall to the comon-wealth, which not im∣properly they termed to cancell, some thinke the name of Chancellor came from this Cancelling: and in a Glossarie of latter time thus we read, A Chancellor is he whose Office is, to looke into and peruse the writings and answers of the Emperour: to cancell what is written amisse, and to signe that which is well. Neither is that true, which Poly∣dore Virgil writeth, namely, that William the Conquerour instituted a Colledge or fellow∣ship of Scribes, to write letters pattents &c. and named the Master of that Societie, Chan∣cellor: considering it is plaine and manifest that Chancellors were in England before the Normans Conquest. How great the dignitie and authoritie of the Chancellor is at this day, it is better knowne than I can declare: but of what credit it was in old time, have heere in a word or two out of a writer of good antiquitie. Robert Fitz. Stephen, who lived under Henry the Second. The dignitie of the Chancellor of England is this, He is reputed the second person in the Realme, and next unto the King; with the one side of the Kings Seale, (whereof by his Office he hath the Keeping) he may signe his owne injunctions, to dispose and order the Kings Chappell as hee liketh, to re∣ceive and keepe all Archbishopricks▪ Bishopricks, Abbeies, and Baronies, void and falling into the Kings hand, to be present at all the Kings Counsels, and thither to repaire uncalled: also that all things be signed by the hand of his Clerke who carrieth the Kings Seale, and that all things be directed and disposed by advise of the Chancellor. Item, that by the helpfull me∣rits of his good life through Gods grace, he need not die, if he will himselfe, but Archbishop or Bishop: And heereof it is, that the Chancellor-ship is not to be bought. The forme and man∣ner of ordaining a Chancellor, (for that also I will note) was in the time of King Hen∣rie the Second, by hanging the great Seale of England about the necke of the Chan∣cellor elect. But in King Henry the Sixth daies, this was the order of it, according to the notes I tooke out of the Records. When the place of the Lord Chancellor of England is void by death, the Kings three great Seales, to wit, one of gold, and other two of silver, which remained in the custodie of the Chancellor, presently after his death are shut up in a wooden chest fast locked, and signed with the Seales of the Lords then present, and so conveied into the Treasurie: From thence brought they are to the King, who in the presence of many No∣blemen delivereth them into the hands of him that shall be Chancellor, and undertaketh the charge of executing the Office of Chancellorship, taking before an oath of him, well and truely to exercise the same: first he delivereth the great Seale of silver, then that of gold, and so the other of silver: who receiving the same bestoweth them againe in the chest: and being signed with his owne Seale conveieth it home to his owne house, and before certaine of the Nobilitie, causeth the Kings Patents and writs to be Sealed. When a Chancellor is dischar∣ged of his place, he delivereth up into the Kings hands in the presence of the Lords and Nobles, those three Seales, first, the Seale of gold, then one broad Seale of silver; and so ano∣ther of a lesse forme. Howbeit at this day one Seale and no more is delivered unto the Chanchellor, neither is there mention any where made of these three Seales, but in the raigne of Henry the Sixth. To this Chancellors Office in processe of time much authoritie and dignitie hath been adjoyned by authoritie of Parliament; especi∣ally ever since that Lawyers stood so precisely upon the strict points of Law, and caught men with the traps and snares of their law termes; that of necessitie there was a Court of equitie to be erected, and the same committed to the Chancellor, who might give judgement according to equitie and reason, and moderate the extremitie of law, which was wont to bee thought extreme wrong. In this Court there sitteth as President, the Lord Chancellor of England, and as assessors or assistants to him, twelve Masters of the Chancerie: whereof the chiefe and principall is the Keeper of the Rolls be∣longing to the same Court, and thereupon he is called Master of the Rolles. There belong also to this Court very many Officers, of whom some attend especially upon the Kings Seale, namely, The Clerke of the Crown, The Clerke of the Hanaper, The Sealer, The Chauff-wax, The Controller of the Hanaper, Cursitours twenty foure, A Clerke for the writs of Sub-poena. Others are attendant upon Bils of complaint there exhibited, to wit, A Protonotarie, sixe Clerkes, or Atturnies of the Court, and a Register. There be∣long also thereto the Clekes of the Petty Bag, The Clerke of Presentations, The Clerke of Faculties, The Clerke for examination of Letters Patents, The Clerke for di∣missions, &c. There is another Court also derived out of the Kings Privie Counsell, Court of Requests. called The Court of Requests, which giveth hearing likewise, as in the Chancerie, to causes be∣tweene private persons, but such as before are presented unto the Prince, or his Pri∣vie Counsell, as also to others. In this are employed certaine Masters of the Requests, and a Clerke or Register, with two Atturneys or three. But as touching those Coun∣sels held in the Marches of Wales and in the North parts, wee will speake with the leave of God in their due place. As for Ecclesiasticall or Spirituall Courts there be two principall; Ecclesiasticall Courts. See the Anti∣quitie of the British Church. Court of the Arches. to wit, The Sy∣node, which is called The Convocation of the Clergie, and is alwaies kept with the Par∣liament: and the Provinciall Synods in both Provinces. After these are reckoned the Archbishop of Canterburies Courts▪ to wit, The Court of the Arches: wherein sitteth as Judge the Deane of the Arches. He is called Deane, for that he hath jurisdiction in xiij. Parishes of London, exempt from the Bishop of London, which number maketh a Deanrie; and Deane of the Arches, because the principall of his Churches is, S. Maries Church in London, the tower, steeple or lanterne whereof is beautifully built of arched worke. He hath to doe with appeales of all men within the Province of Canterburie. Advocates there bee in this Court xvj. or more, at the pleasure of the Archbishop, all Doctors of the Law; two Regi∣sters, and ten Proctours. The Court of Audience, Court of Au∣dience. which entertaineth the complaints, causes and appeales of them in that Province. The Prerogative Court, in which the Commissarie sitteth upon Inheritances fallen either by the Intestate, or by will and testament. The Court of Faculties, Court of Fa∣culties. wherein there is appointed a chiefe President, who hea∣reth and considereth of their grievances and requests that are petitioners for some moderation and easement of the Ecclesiasticall law, sometimes over-strict and rigo∣rous; and a Register beside, who recordeth the Dispensations granted. The Court of Peculiars, which dealeth in certaine Parishes exempt from the Bi∣shops jurisdiction in some Diocesses, and are peculiarly belonging to the Archbishop of Canterburie. Other Courts of meaner account I willingly overpasse. Neither doe I wisely, I assure you, thus to entermeddle heerein: and yet Guicciardine in his Descrip∣tion of the Neatherlands hath given me a precedent hereof to follow. Heere in this place my purpose was to have interserted somewhat, (so farre forth especially as concerned antiquitie) as touching the chiefe Magistrates, and highest Offices of England, as namely, The Lord Chancellor aforesaid, The Lord Treasurer, The President of the Counsell, The Lord Keeper of the Privie Seale, The Lord high Chamberlain, The Lord high Constable, The Mareschall, and Seneschal or Steward of the Kings hous∣hold, &c. But understanding that others were in hand with these matters, so farre am I from preventing them, that right willingly I shall impart even to them, whatsoever in this behalfe I have observed. Vnder what Signe in hea∣ven Britaine lieth. Some man perhaps heere looketh, that I should out of Astrologicall rules, adde to to the rest, under what Signe and Planet our Britaine is seated. And verily I will say somewhat to satisfie the Curious; for in those learned errors I have, I may tell you, in my youth taken some paines: although the Conjecturers of Astrologers touching this point are so divers, that the very diversitie may seeme to weaken the thing it selfe, and leave no place for the truth. M. Manilius an ancient Poet in this verse of his, see∣meth to intimate, that Capricorne heere beareth rule in Britaine: Tu Capricorne regis quicquid sub Sole cadente Expositum. Thou Capricorne doest governe all, That lies to Sun at his down-fall. Ptolomee, Albumazar, and Cardane, doe make Aries our Tutelar Signe; Iohan∣nes de Muris, the Planet Saturne: The Frier Perscrutator, Esquidus and Henrie Silen, the Moone; for that, as they say, it is in the seventh Climate. Roger of Hereford, Thomas of Ravenna, Philologus, and Hispalensis, are of opinion Pisces governe us; and last of all Schonerus, and Pitatus, (see how they all disagree) have with no better reason than the rest, subjected us unto Gemini. Now will I, by Gods assistance, make my perambulation through the Provinces or Shires of Britaine: wherein (according to the Preface that they used in old time, before they tooke any enterprize in hand) God grant me gracious good speed. The order or Method of the worke ensuing. In the severall discourses of every of them, I will declare as plainely, and as briefly as I can, who were their ancient Inhabitants; what is the reason of their names; how they are bounded; what is the nature of the soile; what places of antiquitie, and good ac∣count are therein; what Dukes likewise, or Earles have beene in each one since the Norman Conquest: And in this succession of Earles, to confesse frankly, by whom I have taken profit, I doe willingly and justly acknowledge that Thomas Talbot a most diligent Clerke in the Records of the Tower, a man of singular skill in our anti∣quities, hath given me much light. And begin I will at the farthest parts in the West, that is to say, at Cornwall, and so passe over the other countries in order, imitating herein Strabo, Ptolomee, and the most ancient Geographers, who alwaies begin their description in the Westerne countries, as being first from the Meridian. DANMONII. T Hat Region, which according to the Geographers, is the first of all Britaine, and growing straiter still and nar∣rower, shooteth out farthest into the West, and hath on the North side the Severne-Sea; on the South the Bri∣tish, and on the West, the Vergivian or Westerne Oce∣an, beating upon it; was in ancient time inhabited by those Britaines, whom Solinus called, DVNMONII, Ptolomee, DAMNONII, or (as we find in some other copies,) more truely DANMONII. Which name, if it bee not derived from those ever-continuing mines of tinne in this tract, which the Britans terme Moina ; may seeme to come of the dwelling there under hils. For, their habitation all over this Country is some∣what low, and in valleys: which manner of dwelling is called in the Welch. Bri∣tish tongue Dan-munith: in which sense also the Province next adjoy∣ning, in like respect is at this day named by the Welchmen. Britans Duffneint, that is to say, Ostidamnej. Low valleys. Now whether the OSTIDAMNII, called also OSTAEI, and OSTIONES, of whom Strabo maketh mention out of Pithaeas of Mar∣files, be our Danmonij, I wish the studious searchers of Antiquity would weigh with themselves, and examine somewhat more diligently. For, sea∣ted they were, by their report, in the farthest parts of Europe, toward the West Ocean over against Spaine, not farre from the Isle Vxantissa, now called Vshant, Which particulars every one doe very well, and in each point agree unto this Region of our Danmonij. And seeing that those Ostiones be called by Artemidorus COSSINI, as Stephanus in his Cities seemeth to note, I wish likewise they would consider (because these people are termed also Corini ) whether in stead of COSSINI, Cossini. we are not to read CORINI: For, we read Fusij for Furij, and Valesij for Valerij. And surely, the Geographers have not so much as a glimps where to seeke these Ostidamnij and Cossini, by the westerne Sea, if they be hence excluded. But the Country of this nation is at this day divided into two parts, knowne by later names of Cornwall and Denshire, whereof wee will speake in order. CORNWALL. C Ornwall, which also by later Writers is called Cornubia in Latin, of all Britaine doth beare most Westward, and is inhabited by that remnant of Britans, which Marinus Scotus calleth Occidentales Britones, that is, Britaines of the West parts, who in the British tongue (for as yet they have not lost their ancient language) name it Kernaw, because it waxeth smaller and smaller in manner of an horne, and runneth forth into the Sea with little promontories, as they were hornes, on every side: For the Britaines call an horne, [ Corn ] and hornes [ Kern, Corn and Kern. ] in the plurall number: although others would have Cornwall to take the name of one Corineus, I know not what Companion of Brutus, and doe call it Corinea, according to this verse of a fabulous Poet; Pars Corinea datur Corinaeo, de duce nomen Patria, de{que} viro gens Corinensis habet. To Captaine Corineus, part was given, to hold by right: Of him both coast Corinea, and people Cornish height. But, no strange matter it is (if a man search Antiquities) for many places to have their denominations given them of such kind of scite as this. In Crete and Per copsca. or, Procopia. Taurica Chersonessus, there bee promontories termed, that is, Rams Foreheads, be∣cause they shoote forth into the sea, after the fashion of Rams hornes. Semblably, Cyprus was of the Greekes in old time, called Cerastis, for that it butteth on the sea with promontories bearing out like hornes, so that it is no marvell, if the coast bee called Kernaw, and Corn, crookening inward as it doth, like unto an horne, and having divers smal capes and points sticking out, as it were hornes. Whereupon, when in the heat of the Saxons warre, many Britans retired themselves into this tract, trusting to the naturall strength of the place; for, they knew that the waies by land were hard enough to bee passed through by reason of mountaines, and crossed in divers places with armes of the Sea; that sailing likewise there, was combersome, because the pla∣ces were unknowne: the Saxon being Conquerour, who called all forraine things, and aliens or strangers, in their language , named the Inhabitants hereof and . Hereof sprang the Latin name Cornwallia, and in the la∣ter age Cornubia, and in some writers Occidua Wallia. So farre it is off, that it should be called Cornwallia, of the Gaules that conquered it, which some there bee, that in flatterie of the French name and nation would uphold: who, if they were as quicke-sighted at home, as they bee curious abroad, might find that their Bretaigne or, Little Britaine. Britaine lying upon the sea coast, opposite to this country, is so named of our Britan, and that Cornovaille, no small territorie therein, which speaketh the same language that our Cornishmen doe, tooke name of our countrey-men, that passed over hence to dwell there. For, as these our Britaines of the West parts, aided the Armorici of Gaule, in∣habiting in that tract in their warres against Caesar; upon which occasion hee preten∣ded a quarrell to invade Britaine, and they afterwards comming thither, as wee said before, Strabo. changed the name of Armorici, and called it Britaine: so in the foregoing ages, readie they were, and ever at hand to helpe those Britaines their country-men against the French; and during the tempestuous troubles of the Danish warre, some of them put over thither also, and are thought to have left this name of Cornovaille behind them there. But to leave that Cornovaille. This our Cornwall, as if nature made amends and recompence for the incroching in of the sea, is for the most part raised on high with mountaines, being in the vallies betweene of an indifferent glebe, with which the Sea weede, or reit commonly cal∣led Orewood, Orewood. and a certaine kind of fruitfull Sea-sand, they make so ranke and battle, that it is incredible. The Sea coast, is beautified with very many Townes, able to set out a great fleet of Ships: the inland parts have rich and plenteous mines of tinne. For, Tinne. there is digged out of them wonderfull store of tinne, yielding exceeding much profit and commoditie, where are made houshold pewter vessels, which are used throughout many parts of Europe in service of the table, and for their glittering brightnesse, compared with silver plate. The Inhabitants doe discover these mines by certaine tinne-stones lying on the face of the ground, which they call Shoad, be∣ing somewhat smooth and round. Of these Mines or tinne-workes, there be two kinds: the one they call, Lode-workes ; the other Stream-workes. This lieth in lower grounds, when by trenching they follow the veines of tinne, and turne aside now and then the streames of water comming in their way: that other, is in higher places, when as upon the hils they dig very deepe pits, which they call, Shafts, and doe under∣mine. In working both waies there is seen wonderfull wit and skill, as well in draining of waters aside, and reducing them into one streame; as in the underbuilding, pin∣ning and propping up of their pits: to passe over with silence their devices of break∣ing, stamping, drying, crasing, washing, melting, and fining the mettall, than which there cannot be more cunning shewed. There are also two sorts of Tinne, Blacke tinne, which is tinne-ore broken and washed, but not yet founded into mettall, and white tinne, that is molten into mettall, and that is either soft tinne which is best mer∣chantable, or hard tinne lesse merchantable. That the ancient Britans practised these tinne-works, (to omit Timaeus the Histo∣rian in Plinie, Lib. 6. cap. 8. & 9. who reporteth, That the Britans fetched tinne out of the Isle Icta, in wicker boats covered and stitched about with leather) appeareth for certaine out of Diodorus Siculus, who flourished under Augustus Caesar. For, hee writeth, that the Britans, who Inhabited this part, digged tinne out of stonie ground, and at a low wa∣ter carried the same in carts, to certaine Ilands adjoyning. From whence Merchants transported it by ships into Gaule, and from thence conveied the same upon horses within thirtie daies unto the spring-heads of the river o. Eridanus, or else to the citie Narbone, as it were, to a Mart. Aethicus also, who ever hee was, that unworthily beareth title to be interpreted by S. Hierome out of the Sclavonian tongue, insinua∣teth the very same, and saith, That hee delivered rules and precepts to these Tinne-workers. But it seemeth, that the English-Saxons neglected it altogether, or to have used the workmanship and labour of Arabians or Saracens. For, the Inhabitants in their language terme the mines forlet and given over, Attal Sarisin, that is, the lea∣vings of the Saracens; if they did meane by that name, the ancient Panims. After the comming in of the Normans, the Earles of Cornwal gathered great rich∣es out of these mines, and especially Richard brother to King Henrie the Third: and no marvell, sith that in those daies Europe had tinne from no other place. For, the incursions of the Mores, had stopped up the tinne mines of Spaine; and as for the tinne veines in Germanie, which are in Misnia and Bohemia, they were not as yet knowen: and those verily not discovered, before the yeere after Christs nativitie, 1240. For then, (as a writer of that age recordeth) was tinne mett all found in Germa∣nie by a certain Cornishman driven out of his native soile, to the great losse and hindrance of Richard Earle of Cornwal. This Richard began to make ordinances for these tin-works, and afterward Edmund his sonne granted a Charter, and certain liberties, and withall prescribed certaine Lawes concerning the same: which hee ratified or strengthened under his seale, and imposed a tribute or rent upon tin, to be answered unto the Earls. These liberties, priviledges and lawes King Edward the Third, did afterwards con∣firme and augment. The Com∣mon wealth of Tinners. The whole common-wealth of those Tinners and workmen, as it were, one bodie, hee divided into foure quarters, which of the places they call Foy-more, Black-more, Trewarnaile, and Penwith. Over them all hee ordained a War∣den, called, L. Warden of the Stanniers, of Stannum, that is, Tinne ; who giveth judge∣ment as well according to equitie and conscience, L. Warden of the Stannary. as Law; and appointed to every quarter their Stewards, who once every iij. weeks, (every one in his severall quarter) minister justice in causes personall betweene Tinner and Tinner, and betweene Tinner and Forrainer, except in causes of land, life, or member. From whom there lieth an appeale to the Lord Warden, from him to the Duke, from the Duke to the King. In matters of moment, there are by the Warden generall Parliaments, or severall assem∣blies summoned: whereunto Iurats are sent out of every Stannarie, whose constituti∣ons do bind them. As for those that deale with tinne, they are of foure sorts: the ow∣ners of the soile, the adventurers, the merchants or regraters, and the labourers, called the Spadiards (of their Spade) who poore men are pitifully out-eaten by usurious contracts. But the Kings of England, and Dukes of Cornwall, in their times have reserved to themselves a praeemption of tin (by the opinion of the learned in the Law) as well in regard of the proprietie, as being chiefe Lords and Proprietaries; as of their royall prerogative. Lest the tribute or rent imposed, should be embezelled, and the Dukes of Cornwall defrauded, unto whom by the old custome for every thousand pound waight of tinne there is paid forty shillings, it is by a Law provided, that all the tin which is cast & wrought, be brought to one of the foure appointed townes: where twice in the yeere it is weighed, and signed with a stampe, (they call it Coinage) and the said impost according paid: neither is it lawfull for any man before that, to sell or send it abroad, under forfeiture of their tin. And now only tin is here found, but there∣with also gold and silver; yea, and Diamonds shaped, and pointed anglewise, smoothed also by nature it selfe: whereof some are as big as walnuts, and inferiour to the Orient Diamonds, in blacknesse and hardnesse only. Moreover there is found Eryngium, that is, Cornish Dia∣monds. Sea Holly, growing most abundantly every where along the shore. Furthermore, so plentifull is this countrey of graine, although not without great toile of the husband∣man, that it hath not onely sufficient to maintaine it selfe, but also affoordeth often times great store of corne into Spaine. Besides, a most rich revenue and commoditie they have by those little fishes that they call Pilchards, Pilchards. which swarming, as one would say, in mighty great skuls about the shores from Iuly unto November, are there taken, garbaged, salted, hanged in the smoake, laied up, pressed, and by infinite numbers carried over into France, Spaine, and Italie, unto which countreys they be very good chaffer, and right welcome merchandise, and are there named Which per∣adventure be Gerres in Pli∣nie. Fumados. Where∣upon Michael a Cornish Poet, and of Rhymers in his time the chiefe, in his Sa∣tyre against Henrie of Aurenches, Archpoet to King Henrie the Third, because he had unreverently plaied upon Cornishmen, as if they were seated in the nocke hole of the world; after much satyricall sharpnesse, came out with these round rhymes: Non opus est ut opes numerem quibus est opulenta, Et per quas, inopes sustentat non ope lenta: Piscibus & stanno nusquam tam fertilis ora. I need not here report the wealth, wherewith enrich'd it is, And whereby alwaies to sustaine poore folke it doth not misse: No coast elsewhere for fish and tinne, so plentious, ywis. And yet is Cornwall nothing happier in regard of the soile, than it is for the people; who as they were endued and adorned with all civilitie, even in those ancient times; ( For by reason of their acquaintance with merchants sailing thither for tin, as Diodorus Siculus reporteth, they were more courteous toward strangers: ) so they are valiant, hardie, wel pitcht in stature, brawny & strong limmed: such as for wrastling, (to speak nothing of that manly exercise, Hurling. & fear of hurling the Ball which they use) so farre excell, that for slight and cleane strength together, they justly win the prize and praise from other nations, in that behalfe. Moreover, that Poet Michael, when as in the excessive com∣mendation of his country men, hee had with gigging rimes resounded, how Arthur in his battels, gave them the honour, to give the first charge, he thus couragiously con∣cludeth in rime. Quid nos deterret? si firmiter in pede stemus, Fraus ninos superet, nihil est quod non superemus. What frighteth us? if footing sure we have on steady ground, (Barre crafty sleights) there is no force but we can it confound. And hereof peradventure ariseth the report so generally received, that Giants in times past Inhabited this countrey. For, Havillan the Poet, who lived foure hun∣dred yeares since, in describing of certaine British Giants, wrote pleasantly of Bri∣taine, and the Cornish Giants, Havillan. in Architrenio. in this wise: —Titanibus illa Sed paucis famulosa domus, quibus uda ferarum Terga dabant vestes, cruor haustus, pocula trunci, Antra Lares, Dumeta thoros, coenacula rupes, Praeda cibos, raptus venerem, spectacula caedes, Imperium vires, animos furor, impetus arma, Mortem pugna, sepulchra rubus: monstris{que} gemebat Monticolis tellus: sed eorum plurima tractus Pars erat occidui, terror major{que} premebat Te furor, extremum Zephyri, Cornubia, limen. A lodge it was to Giants fell (though few) of Titans brood Enthralled: whose garments were raw hides of beasts full wood; Their bloud they dranke, but cups they made of hollow blocks and stocks, Caves serv'd for cabins, bushes for beds, for chambers craggie rocks. Prey slak'd their hunger, rape their lust, in murder tooke they Joy, Force gave them rule, and furie heart, wrath weapons to annoy▪ Fight brought thē death, grieves were their graves: thus groan'd the ground againe With mountain-Monsters. Howbeit, of them the number maine Did pester most the westerne tract: more feare made thee agast O Cornwall, utmost dore that art to let in Zephirus blast. Now, whether this firme and wel compact constitution of the Cornish-men which proceedeth from the temperature of heat and moisture, Westerne people most strong and hardie. is to bee referred unto the breeding-west wind and the Westerne situation thereof, like as wee see, that in Ger∣manie the Batavians, in France the Gascoines who be farthest Westward are the ablest and most valiant, or rather to some peculiar and speciall reason of aire and soile; it is not my purpose to search curiously. Now let us treat of the Promontories, Cities and Rivers, whereof ancient writers have made mention: For, this is my principall project: beginning at the furthest point, and so surveying first the Southerne shore, then the Northern, and lastly the course of the river Tamer. Tamara, which severeth this countie from Devonshire. The utmost Promontorie which lieth upon the Western Ocean, and is distant 17. degrees and no more in the globe or surface of the earth, Those of the Tercieres & from the Ilands called Azores, is called by Ptolomee Bolerium, and by Diodorus, Belerium ; perhaps of the British word Pell, which signifieth a thing most remote or farthest off: by Ptolomee also the same is termed , Bellerium or Antivestaeum. or ANTIVESTAEVM, by the Britans, I meane their Bardie onely or Poets, Penringu ed ; that is, the Promontorie of Bloud: For, the Welsh Historians name it Penwith, that is, the Promontorie on the left hand : The Saxons . For, Steort with them betokeneth a peece of land shooting into the Sea: Steort what i signifieth. and hereupon all that Hundred of Penwith at this day is called by borderers in their language, Pen vo las, that is, the end of the land: and in the same sence, we in English name it, The lands end ; because it is the utmost part of the Iland toward the West. And if this Promon∣torie were sometimes called Helenum, as Volaterran and the late writers affirme, it came not of Helenus K. Priams sonne, but of Pen-Elin, which ignifieth in the British tongue an Elbow, as Ancon doth in Greeke. And seeing that crooked and bending shores be termed of the Greekes Anc nes, as Elbows, for so Plinie witnesseth of An∣cona in Italie, no absurditie is it at all, that this crooked and bowing shore should by the Britans in the same sence be called Pen-elin, and thereof that Latin name Helenum be derived. But as touching this name Antivestaeum, I was wont now and then to doubt, whether it savoured not of some Greek originall. For, seeing it was a common and usuall thing with the Greeks, to impose names upon places taken from the names of such as were opposite unto them, not only in Greece it selfe, where they have, Castellidi Lipant n. Rhi∣um, and Mardi Me∣cha or the Red-sea. Antirrhium, but also in the Mardi Me∣cha or the Red-sea. Arabian gulfe, where there is Bacchium and An∣tibacchium, as also upon the gulf of Venice, Antibarrium, because it looketh towards Barrium, lying over against it in Italie; I searched diligently whether any place named Vestaeum, lay opposite unto this our Antivest um : but finding no such thing, I betooke my selfe againe to the British tongue, neither yet can I here resolve my self. But the Inhabitants doe suppose, that this Promontorie heretofore ran further into the Sea, and by the rubbish which is drawne out from thence, the Mariners affirme the ame: yea and the neighbor Inhabitants avouch, out of I wote not what fable, that the earth now covered there all over with the in-breaking of the Sea, was called Lionesse. In the utmost rocks of this Promontorie, when at a low water they be bare, there appeare veines of tin and copper, and the people there dwelling report, that there stood a watch-Tower upon it, from whence by the light of burning fire, there was a signe given unto Sailers: no doubt, ad speculam Hispaniae, according as Orofius hath put downe in writing, That the most high watch-towre of Brigantia in Gallicia, a rare and ad∣mirable peece of worke, was erected ad speculam Britannia: that is, if I well understand him either for the use of Mariners sailing out of Britaine toward Spaine, or else, over against the watch-Towre of Britaine. For, no other place of this Iland looketh di∣rectly to Spaine. Upon it there standeth now a little village named S. Buriens (in old time Eglis Buriens ; that is, The Church of Buriena or Beriena ) consecrated to Buriena, a religious Irish woman. S. Burien. For, this nation alwaies honoured Irish Saints as tutelar patrons of their owne, so, all their Towns in manner they have consecrated unto them. This village King Athelstan, as the report goeth, granted to be a priviledged place or Sanctuarie, what time as he arrived as Conquerour out of the Silly, or Sorlings. Iles of Sylly: True it is, that he built heere a Church, and that under William the Conquerour there was heere a Colledge of Chanons, unto whom the territorie adjoyning belonged. Neere unto this, in a place which they call Biscaw Woune, are to bee seene nine∣teene stones set in a round circle, distant every one about twelve foote from the o∣ther; and in the very center there is one pitched far higher and greater than the rest. A Trophee. This was some Trophee (or monument of victorie) erected by the Romans (as proba∣bly may bee conjectured) under the later Emperours, or else, by Athelstan the Saxon, when he had subdued the Cornish-men, and brought them under his dominion. As the shore fetcheth a compasse by little and little from hence Southward, it let∣teth in a bay or creeke of the Sea, in manner of a Crescent, which they call Mounts∣bay: wherein, as the common speech goeth, the Ocean by rushing with a violent force drowned the land. Vpon this lieth Mousehole, in the British tongue Port Inis, that is, The Haven of the Iland: For which, Henry of Ticis, a Baron in his time and Lord of Alwerton and Tiwernel in this Country, Barons of Ticis. obtained of King Edward the First the grant to have a market there. Likewise there is seated upon this Bay Pen-sans, that is, The Cape or Head of Saints, or as some thinke Sands, Marine Am∣ber, that is, Ambrose stone. a prety market Towne: within a little whereof is that famous stone, Main-Amber ; which, being a great Rock advanced upon some other of meaner size with so equall a counterpeize, a man, may stir with the push of his finger, but to remove it quite out of his place a great number of men are not a∣ble: as also Merkin, that is, Iupiters market, (because Thursday anciently dedicated to Iupiters is their market day) a dangerous rode for ships. And in the very angle and corner it selfe S. Michaels mount, S. Michaels mount. which gave name unto the foresaid Bay; sometime called Dinsol, as wee find in the booke of Landaffe: the Inhabitants name it Careg Cowse, Michelstow. Laurence Noel. that is, The hoary Crag or Rock, the Saxons , that is, Michaels place, as Master Laurence Noel, a man of good note for his singular learning, and who was the first in our age that brought into ure againe and revived the language of our an∣cestours the Saxons, which through disuse lay sorlet and buried in oblivion, hath well observed. This Rocke is of a good height and craggy, compassed round about with water so oft as it is floud, but at every ebbe joyned to the main-land, so that they say of it, It is land and Iland twice a day. For which cause, Iohn Earle of Oxford, not many yeeres ago, presuming upon the strength of the place, chose it for his chiefest defence when he raised war against King Edward the Fourth, and valiantly held the same, but with no good successe. For, his souldiers being assailed by the Kings for∣ces straight waies yeelded. In the very top heereof within the Fortresse, there was a Chappell consecrated to S. Michael, the Archangell, where William Earle of Corn∣wall and Moriton, who by the bounteous gift of King William the First had great lands, & large possessions in this tract, built a Cell for one or two monks; who avouch∣ed that S. Michael appeared in that mount: which apparition, or the like, the Itali∣ans challenge to their hill Garganus, and the Frenchmen likewise to their Mi∣chaels mount in Normandie. At the foote of this mountaine within the memorie of our Fathers, Weapons of Brasse. whiles men were digging up of tin they found Spear-heads, axes, and swords of brasse wrapped in linnen: such as were sometimes found within the forrest Hercinia in Germanie, and not long since in our Wales. For, evident it is by the monuments of ancient Writers, that the Greeks, the Cimbrians and Britans used bra∣zen weapons, although the wounds given with brasse bee lesse hurtfull, as in which mettall there is a medicinable vertue to heale: according as Macrobius reporteth out of Aristotle. But happily that age was not so cunning in devising meanes to mischiefe and murthers, as ours is. In the rocks underneath, as also along the shore every where breedeth the Pyrrhecorax: Cornish chough. Pyrrhecorax, a kind of crow with bill and feet red, and not, as Plinie thought, proper to the Alpes onely. This bird the inhabitants have found to be an Incendiarie, and theevish beside. For, oftentimes it secretly conveieth fire-sticks setting their houses a fire and as closely filcheth and hideth little peeces of money. In this place the countrey is most narrow and groweth as it were into an A narrow passage be∣tweene two creeks or armes of the Sea. Mounts-bay. Isthmus, for it is scarse foure miles over from hence to the Severn or upper sea. A little above this mount, there openeth a Creeke of good bredth, called of the mount, Mountsbay, a most safe rode and harbour for ships, when the South and Southeast winds are aloft and bluster, at a mid ebbe and returne of the Sea, six or seven fathom deepe. More toward the East ariseth Godolcan hill, right famous for plentifull veines of tin (they call it now Godolphin ) but much more renowned in regard of the Lords thereof, Goldphin Hill. bearing the same name, who with their vertues have equalled the ancient∣nesse of that house and linage. The familie of the Godol∣phins. But that name in the Cornish language, came of A white Aegle, and this family hath anciently borne for their armes in a shield Gules, an Aegle displaied Argent, betweene three Flower-deluces of the same, id est Argent like∣wise in a shield Gules. From S. Michaels mount Southward, immediatly there is thrust forth a bi-land or demi-Ile, at the very entrie whereof Heilston sheweth it selfe, called in their country language Hellas, by reason of the salt water flowing thereto: a Towne of great resort for their priviledge of marking and coinage of tin. Under which by the confluence and meeting of many waters there is made a lake two miles in length, Loo poole. named Loo poole, divided from the Sea by a narrow banke running betweene, which whensoever it is by the violence of waves broken thorow, a wonderfull roring of waters is heard far and neere all over the countrey adjoining. And not far from thence there is to be seene a militarie fense or rampier of a large compasse built of stones, heaped toge∣ther and laid without mortar, they call it in their tongue, Earth ; of which sort there be others heere and there: raised, as I verily beleeve, in the Danish warre. Neither is it unlike to those fortifications of the Britans, which Tacitus termeth rudes & informes saxorum compages, that is, rude and ilfavoured compacted piles of stone. As for the said Demi-Iland, it selfe being of a good bignesse and replenished with villages, it is na∣med Meneg, Menna, Me∣neg. and no doubt that MENNA, which out of Cornelius a writer of An∣nals (but whether he be Tacitus, I wot not) Jornandes in his Geticks describeth, and is in some copies found written Memma. For, it is, as he saith, In the utmost coast of Britaine, having in it great store of mettall mines, very full of grasse and herbes, bringing forth more plentifully all those things which serve for pastorage of beasts, rather than nou∣rishment of men. But where as he said, that it hath plenteous store of Mettals, it is now so destitute, that it may seeme long since to have beene exhaust thereof. The Sailers, at this day call the utmost South-West point thereof Lisard ; Ptolomee, The PRO∣MONTORIE OF THE DANMONII, add OCRINVM; Aethicus in that strange Geo∣graphie of his, OCRANVM; and he reckoneth it among the mountaines of the West Ocean. Oc num. Which name whether it take of Ocra, which by Sext. Pompeius, signifieth a craggy hill, I dare not affirme. And yet among the Alpes, Ocrea, Ocriculum, and Inter∣ocrea, drew their denomination of their steepe and rocky site. The Liskard. But seeing that Ochr betokeneth in the British tongue an Edge, what if I should thinke the name was gi∣ven to this Promontorie, because it hath a sharpe edge and groweth at the end pointed in fashion of a cone? In the turning in of the shore from this Meneg, you meet with a Bay very commodious for ships to harbour in, by reason of so many turnings, cones and angled windings therein, receiving into it the little river Vale. Neere unto which within the countrey, Voluba. flourished sometime that ancient Towne Voluba, menti∣oned by Ptolomee: but it is long since either utterly decayed, or hath lost his name: yet it remaineth partly in Valemouth ; Falemouth. or Falemouth Haven. This Haven is as noble as Brindi . Brundusium it selfe in Italie: of exceeding great capacity; for it is able to receive an hundred ships, which may ride therein so a part by themselves, that out of never a one of them the top of anothers Mast can be seene: and most safe withall under the wind, by reason that it is enclosed on every side with brims of high rising banks. In the very entrance of this Haven, there mounteth up an high and steep craggy rock, which the inhabitants call Crage. The gullet on either hand, as well for the defense and safetie of the place, as for terror to enemies, is fortified with block-houses: to wit, the castle of S. Mand East-ward, and toward the West, the fort Pendinas, built both by King Henrie the Eighth: Of which fortresses the Leland. Antiquarian Poet writeth thus: Pendinas. Pendinas tenet asperi cacumen Celsu montis, & intonat frequenter. Mauditi quoque subsidet rotundum Castrum, & impetu fulminat furenti, Portus ostia quá patent Falensis. Pendinas mounted is aloft, On craggy cliffe, and thundreth oft: S. Maudit eke a castle round, That stands beneath on lower ground With gunshot makes Fale mouth resound. But the Haven it selfe is by Ptolomee called Ostium CENIONIS, The mouth of Cenio, Cenionis ostium. doubtlesse of the British word Geneu, which betokeneth a doore and entrance. And this to bee true, the Towne Tregenie neere adjoyning doth testifie: for it is as much (if a man interpret it) as a little Towne by the Mouth. Vpon the innermore creeks and nooks of this Haven, there stand some Townes: namely, Peryn, for a mar∣ket well frequented, Perin. where Walter Bronescome Bishop of Excester, in the yeeae 1288. erected a Collegiat Church, Glasnith. Arwenak. (they call it Glasnith ) and twelve Prebendaries: Arwe∣nak, the seat of the ancient and noble family of the Killegrewes; Truro, in the Cor∣nish tongue Truru, so called of three Streets encircled, as it were, with two rivers; a Maior Towne, as they call it, and endowed with many priviledges, and coynage of tin: also Grampound, which is seated farthest from the Haven, and neighbour to it is Golden the inheritance of Tregian, a house ancient and well allied. But descending to the Havens mouth you may see Fenten-Gollan, in English Hartes-well, lately the seat of Carminow a family anciently of high esteeme for bloud and wealth, Carminow. betweene whom and the Lord Scrope two hundred yeeres since, was a plea commenced in the Court of Chivalry, for bearing in a shield Azure a Bend Or.] Vnder which on the Sea side lieth the territorie of Rosseland; so named, as some thinke, as if it were a rose∣plot: but as I suppose, Rossi . because it is an heath or place of lings: for so Ros signifieth in the British tongue. Whereof, Rosse in Scotland, and another Rosse in Wales have their names, as being tracts drie, hungry and barren: Howbeit, this heere, through the industrie of the husbandmen is more battle-ground and fruitfull. Beyond this Rosse∣land presently the Ocean (as the land retireth and giveth back) shooteth in and ma∣keth a large Bay; they call it Tru-ar-draith Bay, which is by interpretation, The Bay of the towne upon the sand: Lansladron. In the time of Edward the First. whereunto fall many fresh rillets, amongst which that is princi∣pal which passeth by Lanladron, whose Lord S. Serlo Lanladron was summoned a Ba∣ron to the Parliament, in that age when the select men for wisedome and worth a∣mongst the Gentrie were called to Parliament, and their posterity omitted if they were defective therein. Foy. Scarse two miles from hence, whereas the river Fawey fal∣leth into the Sea, lieth the Towne Fowey, Foath in Cornish, stretching out in length upon the sea banke: a Towne most renowned in former ages, for sea-fights: which the very armes of the Towne doe witnesse, as being compounded of the Cinque-ports arms, By the haven it hath bulwarks on both sides built by King Edward the Fourth: who shortly after being displeased with these townesmen of Fowey, for that when the warre in France was compounded, they practised piracy upon the French; tooke from them all their ships and furniture for shipping. Von the other bank over against it standeth Hall, situate on the hanging of an hill with a right pleasant vvalke, the ha∣bitation full vvell knovvne of Sir Reginald Mohun Knight, The Mohuns. Vzella. Britans have not the letter . of an ancient and noble house by birth, as descended from the Mohunes, of Somerset, and the Courtneyes Earles of Devonshire. Farther vvithin the countrie, and by the same river, VZELLA mentioned by Ptolomee is seated: vvhich tovvne hauing not lost altogether the old name, is at this day called Lest-uthiell : It stood anciently upon an high hill, vvhere the old castle Lestmel now sheweth his ruins: but it was removed lower into the valley. From the high situation it received the ancient name; for Vchel in the British tongue soundeth as much as [ high ] or [ aloft ]: whence Vxellodunum in France. Vxellodunum also in France tooke the name, because the towne standing upon an hill had a very steep fall on every side. In the British storie, this is called Pen-uchelcoit ; that is, The high hill in the wood: which some would have to be Exceter. But the situation in Ptolomee, and the name re∣maining still, prove this to be the ancient Vzella. In these our dayes, a small towne it is and nothing populous, because the river Fawey, which aforetime was wont at eve∣ry tide or high water to flow unto the very towne and to beare and bring in ships, hath his channell so choked and damned up now with sands, comming from the tin-workes (wherewith all the havens in this province are like in processe of time to be choked up) as that it is hardly able to beare the least barge that is. Howbeit, the chiefe towne it is of the whole countie, How the ha∣vens in Cornwall come to be stopped up. where the Shiriffe sitteth judicially every moneth and determineth causes: and there the Warden of the Stannaries hath his prison. It enjoyeth also the priviledge, by the bounteous favour, as themselves say, of Edmund Earle of Cornwall (who there in times past had his honor) to seale or coyne the tin. But there bee two townes above the rest that hinder the light and eclipse the fame of this; Leskerd. to wit, on the East side thereof Leskerd, situat on the top of a very high hill, much frequented for the mercat, and renowned for an ancient castle there: Bodman. and on the North side Bodman, which standeth on the side hand of it scarse two miles off: and is named (if I be not deceived) Bosuenna in the Cornish tongue, and Bod∣minian in old Deeds and Charters. This towne situate thus in no healthy seat between two hils, and lying out in length East and West, is for the mercat there kept, of great resort, for the inhabitants populous, beautifull enough for building, and of name for their priviledge of coinage of tin: but more famous in ancient time for the Bishops See there. For, about the yeere of our salvation 905, when the State of the Church lay in this tract altogether neglected, The booke of Win∣chester Ab∣bey. by vertue of a decree from Pope Formosus, King Edward the Elder erected heere a Bishops See, and granted at that time unto the Bi∣shop of Kirton, three villages in this countrie, Polton, Caeling, and Lanwitham, that from thence every yeere he should visit the people of Cornwall, to fetch out of them their er∣rours: for, before time they did what they could to resist the truth, and obeied not the A∣postolicall decrees. But afterwards, in the furious heat of that terrible Danish warre, the Bishoprick was translated to Saint Germans. Hard by Leskerd lyeth that which sometime was the Church of S. Guerir, that is, (if you interpret it out of the British speech) S. Leech or Physician: where, (as writeth Asserius) King Alfred lying prostrate at his prayers, recovered out of a sicknesse. But when Neotus a man of singular holi∣nesse and learning, was afterwards entombed in the same Church, hee outshone the light of the other Saint, so as that in his memorie it was named Neotestow, that is, The place of Neotus, S. Neots. and now Saint Neoths: and the religious men that served God there∣in were named Saint Neoths Clerkes, and had for their maintenance rich and large revenues, as we may see in William Conquerours booke. Neere unto this, as I have learned, Doomesday. within the parish of Saint Clare, there are to be seene in a place called Pen∣nant, that is, The head of the vale, two monuments of stone: of which the one in the up∣per part is wrought hollow in manner of a Chaire: the other, named Otherhalfe stone, hath an inscription of Barbarous characters, now in manner worne out, in this wise. Which as I take it, should be read thus, Doniert Prayer for the soule, &c. DONIERT: ROGAVIT, PRO ANIMA: unlesse it please you to give this conjecture, that those little pricks after DONIERT, are the reliques of the letter E: and then to read it after this manner, DONIERT ERO∣GAVIT, as if he had given and bestowed upon those religious men, that peece of land, for his soule. As for Doneert, I cannot but thinke, he was that Prince of Corn∣wall, whom the Chronicles name Dungerth, and record, that he was drowned in the yeere of our Salvation 872. Hard by, there is a number of good big rockes heaped up together, and under them, one Stone of lesser size, fashioned naturally in forme of a cheese, so as it seemeth to be pressed like a cheese, whereupon it is named, Wring-cheese. Many other Stones be∣sides in some sort foure square, Wring-cheese. are to be seene upon the plaine adjoyning; of which seven or eight are pitched upright of equall distance asunder. The neighbour Inha∣bitants terme them Hurlers, as being by a devout and godly error perswaded, they had beene men sometimes transformed into Stones, Hurlers. for profaning the Lords Day, with hurling the ball. Others, would have it to be a Trophee (as it were) or a monu∣ment, in memoriall of some battell: And some thinke verily they were set as meere stones or land marks, as having read in those authors that wrote of Limits, that stone were gathered together of both parties, The river Loo. and the same erected for bounders. In this coast the river Loo maketh way and runneth into the sea: and in his very mouth gi∣veth name to two little townes, joyned with a bridge together. That on the West side, which is the newer, flourisheth most: but the other Eastward, time hath much decayed: although it bee a Corporation retaining still the priviledge of a Maior and Burgesses. Somewhat West-ward from this lieth Kilgarth the habitation of the Bevils of especiall good note for antiquity and gentry. From Loo East-ward you meet with no memorable thing, but a small river passing by Minhevet, whereby is Pole the seat of the Trelawnies, to whom with others the inheritance of the Courtneys Earles of Devon accrewed: S. Germans. untill you come to the Liver, a little river stored with oisters, that runneth under S. Germans a small towne, unto which during the tempestuous Da∣nish warre, the Bishops Sees were for feare translated: where there is a prety Church dedicated unto S. German of Antiziodorum, who rooted out the heresie of Pelagius, that sprung up againe in Britaine. Wherein after that some few Bishops had sitten, Levinus the Bishop of Kirton, who was in great favour with Canutus the Dane, ob∣tained by vertue of the Kings authoritie, that it should be Joyned to his See. Since which time, there hath beene but one Bishop over this Province and Denshire both (whose seat is now at Exceter): and who appointed the little Towne of S. Germans to be the seat of his Suffragan. For at this day, it is nothing else but a village consisting of fishermens cabins, that make a good gainfull trade, by catching store of fish in the Ocean and rivers neere adjoyning. Trematon. Some few miles from hence, upon the same river standeth Trematon, bearing the name of a Castle, though the wall bee halfe downe; in which, as we find in Domesday booke, William Earle of Moriton had his Castle, and held his mercate, and was the capitall seat of the Baronie belonging to the Earles and Dukes of Cornwall, as we may see in the Inquisitions. When the Liver is past this Castle, neere unto Saltash, sometimes Esse, the habitation in old times of the De vallet Val∣torts, and now a Towne well replenished with Merchants, and endowed with many priviledges, it runneth into the river Tamar, the bound of the whole countrey: where at the East-side Mont-Edgecombe, Edge-Com the seat of that ancient family of the Edgecombs, sited most pleasantly hath a prospect into an haven underneath it, full of winding creekes. Anthony. Next unto which is Anthony, a Towne memorable for the elegant building thereof, as also for a fish poole that letteth in the Ocean, and yeeldeth sea-fish for pro∣fit and pleasure both: but more memorable it is for the Lord thereof, Richard Carew, who so maintaineth his place and estate left unto him by his ancestors, as that in orna∣ments of vertues he surmounteth them. Hitherto we have surveied the South coast: now let us take a view of the Northern also. The Northern-shore from the very lands end, having for a great length huge banks of sand driven upon heapes against it, shoo∣teth out first to a Towne running into the sea with a long ridge like a tongue, called S. Iies, S. Iies. taking the name of one Iia an Irish woman that lived heere in great holinesse, for anciētly it was named Pendinas. And from her the Bay underneath into which the lit∣tle river Haile falleth, hath likewise received the name, for the Mariners call it S. Iies Bay. As for the Towne it selfe, it is now very small: For, the North west wind that playes the tyrant in this coast by drifts of sand hath so beaten upon it, that from thence it is translated and removed. From hence the countrey on both sides, still Eastward, waxeth broader, and the Northern shore with a more crooked winding holdeth on In Aquil n m, or North. North-east as far as Padstow: neither all that way along hath it any thing savouring of antiquity, save onely a Chappell built in the sands, to the honor of S. Pi∣ran, who being likewise an Irish Saint resteth heere entombed: unto whose Sanctitie a certaine vaine writer in his childish folly hath ascribed this miracle, that with three kine of his owne he fed ten Kings of Ireland and their armies eight dayes together: also that hee raised from death to life both pigs and men. S. Columbs Then, farther from the shore is seated S. Columbs a little mercate Towne, consecrated to the memoriall of Columba a right devout woman and a martyr, & not of Columban the Scot, as now I am given to understand for certaine, out of her life. Neere unto which, but more to the sea-ward, Lhanheton Lhanheton sheweth it selfe, the seat of the Arondels, a familie of Knights degree, who for their faire lands and large possessions were not long since called, the Great Arondels. In some places they are written in Latin, De Hirundine, and not amisse, if my judgement be ought: For Hirundo, that is, a Swallow, is named Arondell in French: and i a shield sables, they beare for their armes six Swallowes argent. Lib. 3. Phil peinos, of W liam Brit who lived anno 117▪ Certes, a very ancient and renowned house this is, spreading far and neere the branches of their kinred and affinity: unto the name and coat-armour whereof Wil∣liam Brito a Poet alluded, when as he describeth a valiant warriour out of this familie flying as it were upon William of Bar a French noble man, and assailing him, about the yeere of our Lord 1170. in these termes: —Hirundelae velocior alite, quae dat Hoc agnomen ei, fert cujus in aegide signum, Se rapit agminibus medijs, clypeo{que}, m enti Quem sibi Guilielmus laeva praetenderat ulna, Immergit validam praeacutae cuspidis hastam. —more swift, than bird hight Swallow. Arondell That giv's him name, and in his shield of armes emblazoned well, He rides amid the armed troupes, and with his speare in rest (The staffe was strong, the point right sharpe) runs full upon the brest Of Sir Guillaum, and pierceth through his bright and glittering shield, Which on left arme he for defence, against him stoutly held. Within a little hereof, there is a double rampire intrenched upon the pitch of an hill, with a causey leading thereto, named, Castellan Denis, that is, The Danes Campe ; because the Danes when they preyed upon the coasts of England, encamped them∣selves there, Castle Denis. like as they did in other places of this tract. Nor farre from hence the river Alan, which also is called Camb-alan, and Camel, of the crooked windings & reaches that it makes in his course, (for so Cam with them doth signifie) runneth gently into the upper sea: which river at the very mouth thereof hath Padstow a pretty market towne, Padstow. so called shor for Petroekstow, (as we read in the Histories of Saints) of one Petrocch a Britan, canonized a Saint by the people: who, spent his daies here in the service of God, whereas before time it had the name of Lo∣deric and Laffenac. The site of this Town is very commodious for traffique in Ireland, to which men may easily saile in foure and twentie houres. And much beautified it is with faire and goodly houses adjoyning thereto, in manner of a Castle, built by N. Prideaux, a Gentleman of ancient gentry in those West parts. At the Spring-head of this river Alan, standeth the little village Camelford, otherwise Gaffelford. Leland Judgeth, it was in old time called Kamblan, who writeth also, That King Ar∣thur our Hector was there slaine: For, as hee recordeth, peeces of armour, rings, horse-harnesse of brasse are otherwhiles digged up, and turned out of the ground by husbandmen: and the common fame that continued so many ages together, repor∣teth, that there was a notable battell fought in this place. There are also certaine ver∣ses in an unknowne Poet living in the middle time, of Cambula flowing with bloud, shed in a battell of Arthur against Mordred: which I will not thinke much of my la∣bour to put downe, because they may seeme to have beene written in no bad Poeti∣call vaine. —Natur m Cambula fontis Mutatam stupet esse sui, transcendit inundans Sanguineus torrens ripas, & volvit in aequor Corpora caesorum, plures natare videres Et petere aexilium, quos undis vita reliquit. Then Cambula was sore agast, the nature chang'd to see Of his spring-head, for now the streame by this time gan to bee All mixt with bloud, which swelling high the banks doth overflow, And carry downe the bodies slaine, into the sea below. There might one see how many a man that swum and helpe did crave, Was lost among the billowes strong, and water was their grave. And in very deed (not to deny this of Arthur) I have read in Marianus, that the Bri∣tans and Saxons fought in this place a bloudy battell, in the yeere of our Lord 8 0, so that this may seeme a place consecrated unto Mars. And if it be true that Arthur here died, the same coast was destined unto him for his death, as for his birth. For, on the shore hard by, standeth Tindagium (the native place of that great Arthur) partly upon a little ridge, Tindagel. putting forth, as it were, a tongue; and partly within an Iland, having both of them sometime a bridge betweene. They call it at this day Tindagel, beeing now a glorious ruine onely, The place of Arthurs Na∣tivitie. in times past a stately Castle: of which a late Poet hath thus written: Est locus Abrini finnoso littore ponti Rupe situs media, refluus quem circuit astus; Fulminat hic lat turrit vertice castrum, Nomine Tindagium veteres dixere Corini. There is a place within the winding shore of Severne Sea On mids a rocke about whose foote the tides turne-keeping play, A Towry-topped Castle here farre thundreth over all, Which Cornishmen by ancient name, Tindagel Castle call. A long discourse it would aske to declare here out of Geffries history, how Uther Pendragon King of Britaine, within this Castle became enamoured upon the wife of Gorlois Prince of Cornwall; and how by Magick slights and delusions, taking the shape of her husband upon him, dishonourably violated the Ladie his wife, and of her be∣gat the said renowned Arthur. Architrenius. It may suffice, if I doe but alleage the verses of our Po∣et Iohn Havillan. —Facie dum falsus adulter Tindagel irrupit, nec amoris Pendragon astum Vincit, & omnificas Merlini consulit artes, Mentitur{que} ducis habitus, & rege latente, Induit absentis praesentia Gorlois ora, Whiles Pendragon that could not quench his flaming heats of love, But beare a mind adult'rous still, by meanes brake in above To Tindagel, disguis'd in face, by Merlin taught thereto, By magicke and inchauntments strange, which all such feats could doe. Duke Gorloes habite, absent then that was, he tooke by guile; But presence of the King in place he did conceale the while. This Uther Pendragon verily was a Prince flourishing in Mar iall feats, & who va∣liantly upheld the decaying state of his countrey against the English Saxons: But whether came from him, That Royall Banner in England, having the portraict of a Dra∣gon with a golden head, Banners. whereof of neighbour nations have had experience, and which in far Lands beyond sea was under King Richard the First, terrible to the Panims, I dare not a∣vouch: I would beleeve rather, it was received from the Romans, who a long time used the Eagle, after that Marius had rejected the Ensignes of a Wolfe, of Minotaurus, of an Horse, &c. And in the end under the latter Emperors, tooke them to the Dra∣gon: Whereupon Claudianus writeth thus: —Hij picta Draconum Calla levant— The banners these advance aloft With speckled necks of Dragons wrought. And Nemesianus: Signa micant, sinuat{que} truces levis aura Dracones. Their Ensignes shine, and Dragons fell that therein pictur'd show, Wave to and fro with whiffes of wind, as it doth gently blow. And Hoveden sheweth, that the West Saxon Kings used to carrie in their Ban∣ners, the Dragon. Tufa, a Ban∣ner. As for another Banner of the English, which Beda called Tufa, as also the Danes, Reafan, I will say nothing of them in this place, for feare I may seeme to have digressed too farre from my purpose. Betweene Padstow and Tindagel, inwardly there extendeth a fruitfull veine, and therein flourish the families of Roscar∣rock, Carnsew, Penkevell, Cavell, Pencavell, of ancient name and great respect in this coast. Forward still, Eastward on the same coast which is open, barren, and destitute of woods, Botereaux. there butteth upon the sea Botereaux Castle, corruptly by the common peo∣ple, called Boscastle, built by the Lords Botereaux, who gave for their armes three Buf∣fones, toads sable in a shield Argent. William Botereaux was the first famous man of honour in this familie, who married Alice the daughter of Robert Corbet, whose si∣ster was Paramour to King Henrie the First, of whom hee begat Reginald Earle of Cornwall. From this William there flourished eleven successively in order. But Mar∣garet the onely daughter and sole heire of the last, was wedded unto Robert Hun∣gerford: by whose posteritie the Inheritance is devolved upon the familie of the Ha∣stings, which inheritance was augmented, and became more honourable by marria∣ges, that those of Botereaux contracted with the heires of the Noble houses, De Moe∣les, S. Laud, commonly called, S. Lo, and Thweng. De Sancto Laud . From hence the Land shooting forth into the Sea, extendeth it selfe so farre north∣ward, that the countrey carrieth here full three and twenty miles in breadth, betweene the two seas, which hitherto went on still drawen after a sort together into a narrow streit. In this greatest breadth of it, standeth Stow upon the sea-side, the ancient habitation of the Creenvils: Stow. Greenvils. which verily for Antiquitie and Noblenesse of birth is a famous house: out of which one Richard, in the raigne of William Rous. Rufus, was for his valour much renowned among those worthy Knights that subdued Gla∣morganshire in Wales: and another of late daies surnamed likewise Richard, for his magnanimitie surpassing the Nobilitie of his bloud, fighting most valiantly against the Spaniards at the Ilands of Tercera, lost his life, as I shall shew more fully in my Annals. To this Stratton lieth close to a market Towne of no meane name amongst the neighbours for their gardens, Stratton. and good garlicke: and next unto it Lancels a faire new seat of that old family, de Calvo monte, or, Chaumond. The river TAMARA, now TAMAR, shewing his head here not farre from the nor∣thren shore, The river Tamar. taketh his course with a swift running streame southward; encreased with the channels of many rivelets hard by TAMARA, a Towne mentioned by Ptolo∣mee, now called Tamerton, by Tamar an ancient Mannour of the Trevilions, to whom by marriage, the Inheritance of Walesborough and Ralegh of Netlested descended: also, by Lanstuphadon, that is, Saint Stephens, commonly and contractly Launston, which standeth farther off from his banke: a proper little Towne this is, situate upon the pitch of a prettie hill, which of two Burgards, Dunevet and Newport, is growne as it were, into one Burgh. At the first comming of the Normans, William Earle of Moriton, built a Castle there; and had a Colledge of Canon corum. Chanons, or Secular Priests, as appeareth out of Domesday book, wherein it is named Launstaveton, of that Colledge, no doubt, Launston. built in the honour of Saint Stephen, which Reginald Earle of Cornwall, about the yeere of our Lord 1150, turned into a monasterie. Against which pious worke of his, the Bishops of Excester, carried away over much and seduced with hu∣mane and private affection, were verie maliciously bent, as fearing exceedingly, lest one day it would become a Bishops seat, and so prejudice and impeach their jurisdiction. At this day this Town is best knowne, by reason of the common Goale of the coun∣trey, and the Assises, which are often times kept there. Then Tamar looketh up unto an high hil stretched out in length, with a vast head, which Marianus nameth , and interpreteth it, Hengists mount ▪ commonly called, Hengston-hill. Which in times past was so plentifull of Tinne veines, that the countrey people had this by word of it, [Hengston downe well ywrought,] [Is worth London deere ybought.] And it was an ordinarie place, where every seven or eight yeere, the Stannarie men of Cornwall and Denshire, were wont in great frequencie, to assemble together, and to consult about their affaires. At this hill in the yeere of savation DCCCXXXI, the British Danmonij, who calling the Danes to aid them of purpose to break into Devonshire, that they might drive out the English from thence, who alreadie possessed themselves of the countrey, were pitiously defeated by King Egbert, and slaine almost to the very last man. Beneath it Tamar leaveth Halton the habitation of the Rouses, anciently Lords of Little Modbery in Devonshire, and running nigh unto Salt-Esse, a prettie market Towne seated in the descent of an hill, which hath a Major and certaine priviledges of their owne, Salt-Esse. as I said erewhile, it en∣tertaineth the river Liver, on which standeth that same Towne of Saint Germans, whereof I spake before. And now by this time spreading broader, dischargeth it selfe into the Ocean, making the haven which in the life of Saint Indractus, is called Ta∣merworth, after it hath severed Cornwall from Denshire. For Athelstane, the first Eng∣lish King that brought this countrey absolute under his dominion, appointed this ri∣ver to be the bound or limit, between the Britans of Cornwal, and his Englishmen af∣ter he had remooved the Britans out of Denshire, as witnesseth William of Malms∣burie, who calleth it Tambra. Whereupon Alexander Necham, in his Praises of di∣vine wisedome, writeth thus: Loegriae Tamaris divisor Cornubiae{que}, Indigenas ditat pinguibus Isiciis. Tamar that Lhoegres doth divide from Cornwall in the west, The neighbour-dwellers richly serves with Salmons of the best. The place requireth here, Saint Vrsula, and 11000. Virgins. that I should say somewhat of the holy and devout virgin Ursula descended from hence, as also of the eleven thousand British Virgins. But such is the varietie of Writers, whiles some report they suffered martyrdome under Gra∣tian the Emperour about the yeare of our Lord CCCLXXXIII, upon the coast of Ger∣manie, as they sailed to Armorica; others by Attlia the Hun, that scourge of God, in the yeare CCCCL. at Coline upon Rhene, as they returned from Rome; that with some it hath brought the truth of the History into suspition of a vaine fable. And as touching that Constantine, whom Gildas termeth a tyrannous whelpe of the uncleane Danmonian Lionesse ; as also of the Disforresting of all this country, (for before time it was reputed a Forrest) let Historians speake, for it is no part of my purpose. As for the Earles, Earles of Cornwall. none of British bloud, are mentioned but onely Candorus (called by others Cadocus ) who is accounted by late writers, the last Earle of Cornwall, of British race, and as they which are skilfull in Heraldry, have a tradition, bare XV. Be∣saunts V. IIII. III. II. and I. in a shield Sable. But of the Normans bloud the first Earle was Robert of Moriton, halfe brother to William Conqueror, by Herlotta, their mother; after whom succeeded William his sonne: who when hee had sided with Robert of Normandie against Henry the First, King of England, being taken priso∣ner in battell, lost both his libertie, and his honours; and at last turned Monke at Ber∣mondsey. Then Reginald, a base sonne of Henrie the First, by the daughter of Sir Robert Corber, (for, that King plied getting children so lustfully, as that hee was father of thirteene Bastards) was placed in his roome. Robert de Monte. 1175. This Reginald dying without issue male legitimate, King Henry the Second, having assigned unto his daughters certaine lands and Lordships, reserved this Earledome to himselfe, for the ehoore of his owne youngest sonne Iohn, a child of nine yeares old, upon whom his brother Ri∣chard the First conferred it afterwards with other Earledomes. This Iohn afterward was crowned King of England, and his second sonne Richard, was by his brother King Henry the Third, endowed with this honour, and the Earledome of Poictou: a Prince verily in those daies puissant, in Gods service devout and religious, in war right valiant, for counsell sage and prudent, who in Aquitaine fought battels with fortunate successe, and shewed much valour: and having made a voyage into the Holy Land, enforced the Sarazens to make truce with him: the Kingdome of Apulia, offered un∣to him by the Pope he refused; the troubles and tumults in England, he often times composed; and in the yeare of our Lord MCCLVIL. by some of the Princes Electours of Germany was chosen King of the Romans, and crowned at Aquisgrane: where∣upon, as if he had made meanes thereto by money, this verse was so ri e and currant every where. Nummus ait pro me, nubit Cornubia Romae. For me, my money, saieth this, Cornwall to Rome now wedded is. For, so well monied he was before, that one, who then lived, hath put downe in writing, that for ten yeares together hee might dispend one hundred markes a day. But when as Germanie was all on a light fire with civil warres among competitors of the Empire, he returned quickly into England, where he departed this life, and was in∣terred in the famous Monastery of Hales which he had built; a little after that his first begotten son Henry, newly in his return from the Holy Land, whiles he was at divine service, devoutly occupied within a church at Viterbium in Italy, was by Guy de Mont∣fort, son of Simon Montfort Earle of Leceister, in revenge of his fathers death, wicked∣ly slaine. Edmund therefore, his second son succeeded in the Earledome of Cornwall; who died without any lawfull issue: and so his high and great estate of inheritance re¦turned to King Edward the First, as who was the next unto him in bloud, and Haeresinven∣tus. found (as our Lawyers say) his heire. Whereas that Richard and Edmund his sonne, Princes of the bloud Royall of England, bare divers Armes from the Armes Royall of Eng∣land, to wit, in a shield argent, a Lyon rampant, gules crowned, or, within a border sa∣bles Bezante, I have with others oftentimes much marvelled at: neither (I assure you) can I alleage any other reason, but that they in this point imitated the house Royall of France, (for the manner of bearing Armes came from the French men unto us.) For, the younger sonnes of the Kings of France, even to the time wee now speake of, bare other coats than the Kings themselves did, as we may see in the family of Ver∣mandois, Dreux, and Courtney: and as Robert Duke of Burgundy, brother to Henrie the First, ande d' Or & d' Azur ala bordeure de Gueules. Memoriales de Aquitaine. King of France, tooke unto him the ancient shield of the Dukes of Burgun∣die: so we may well thinke, that this Richard having received the Earledome of Poictou, from Henry the Third his brother, assumed unto him that Lyon gules crow∣ned, which belonged to the Earles of Poictou before him, (as the French writers doe record) and added thereto the border garnished with Besaunts, out of the ancient coat of the Earles of Cornwall. For so soone as the younger sonnes of the Kings of France began to beare the Armes of France with differences, semblably they did among us, and began first at Edward the First his children. But whither am I carried away from my purposed matter, as forgetting my selfe in the delight I take of mine owne studie, and profession? When Cornwall was thus reverted unto the Crowne, King Edward the Second, who had received from his father faire lands and possessions here, be∣stowed the title of Earle of Cornwall, upon Piers Gaveston a Gascon, who had ensna∣red his youth by the allurements of corrupt life: But when as hee for corrupting the Prince, and for other heinous crimes, was by the Nobles intercepted, and beheaded; there succeeded him Iohn of Eltham, a younger sonne of Edward the Second, advan∣ced thereto by his brother Edward the Third, Dukes of Cornwall. who dying young, and without issue also, Edward the Third erected Cornwall into a Dukedome, and invested Edward his sonne a Prince most accomplished with martiall prowesse, in the yeare of Christ 1336. Duke of Cornwall, by a wreath on his head, a Ring upon his finger, and a silver verge. Since which time, that I may note so much under warrant of record, (let the skilfull Lawyers judge thereof) the King of Englands eldest sonne is reputed Duke of Corn∣wall by birth, and by vertue of a speciall Act, the very first day of his nativitie is pre∣sumed and taken to be of full and perfect age, so that he may sue that day for his live∣rie of the said Dukedome, and ought by right to obtaine the same, as well as if hee had beene full one and twentie yeares old: Orig. 35. H. 6. and he hath his Royalties in certaine actions, in Stannary matters, in wracks at sea, customes, &c. yea, and divers ministers or offi∣cers assigned unto him, for these and such like matters. But more plainly, and fully in∣structed are we in these points by Richard Carew of Anthony, a Gentleman innobled no lesse in regard of his Parentage, and descent, than for his vertue, and learning, who hath published, and perfected the description of this countrey more at large, and not in a slight, and meane manner, whom I must needs acknowledge to have given me much light herein. There be in this Countie Parishes 161. DEVONIAE Comitatus Vulgo Den Shyre quam olim DANMONII Populi Incoluerunt DENSHIRE. T He neerer or hithermore region of the Danmonians, that I speake of, is now commonly called Denshire, by the Cornish-Bri∣taines Deuinan, and by the Welsh Britaines Duffneint, that is, Low valleies, for that the people dwell for the most part be∣neath in vales: by the English Saxons Deven- , whereof grew the Latine name Devonia, and by that contraction, which the vulgar people useth, Denshire; and not of the Danes, as some smatterers of meane knowledge most stifly maintaine: a countrey which as it exten∣deth it selfe both waies wider than Cornwall, so is it harborous on either side with more commodious Havens, no lesse inriched with tin mines, especially West-ward; garnished with pleasanter medowes, sightly with greater store of woods, and passing well replenished with Townes, and buildings. But the soile in some places againe, is as leane, and barren: which not withstanding yieldeth fruit to the Husbandman plen∣teously, so that he be skilfull in husbandry, and both can take paines, and be able with∣all to defray the cost. Neither is there in all England almost any place where the ground requireth greater charges: Sand, making grounds fruit∣full. For, in most parts thereof it groweth in manner barren, if it be not overstrewed, and mingled with a certaine sand from the Sea, which is of great efficacie to procure fertilitie, by quickning, as it were, and giving life unto the glebe: and therefore in places far from the shore it is bought at a deare rate. In describing of this region, I will first travell over the West-side, as the river Ta∣mara runneth along, and then the South coast which bordereth on the Ocean: From whence by the Easterne bounds where it confineth upon Dorset, & Sommerset shires, I will returne backe unto the Northern, which is hemmed in with the Severne Sea. Tamar which divideth these two shires, first on this part receiveth into it from the East a rivelet called Lid, which passeth by Coriton, and K. Sidenham small town∣lets, but which have given surnames to ancient, and worshipfull families, to Lidstow a little mercate Towne, and Lidford, now a small village, but in ancient time, a famous Towne, which in the yeare 997. was most grievously shaken, and dispoiled by the fu∣rious rage of the Danes, (which as it is written in that booke, whereby William the First tooke the survey and value of England) was not wont to be rated and asceased at any other time, nor otherwise than London was. That little river Lid, here at the bridge, gathered into a streight, and pent in between rocks, runneth downe amaine, and holloweth the ground daily more and more so deepe, that his water is not seene; only a roaring noise is heard to the great wonder of those that passe over. Beneath it, Tavistoke. The Charter of the foun∣dation. Tamar receiveth Teave a little river, on which Teavistok, commonly cal∣led Tavistoke flourisheth, a town in times past famous for the Abbey there, which Or∣dulph, the son of Ordgare Earle of Devonshire, (admonished by a vision from heaven) built about the yeare of our Saviour Christ Dcccclxj. a place, as William of Malmes∣burie describeth it, Pleasant in regard of the groves standing so conveniently about it, and of the plenteous fishing there, for the handsome and uniforme building also of the Church, for the sewers from the river passing downe along by the houses of office, which runne with such a force of their owne, that they carry away with them all the superfluitie they find. Saint Rumon is much spoked of, and lies as Bishop there. There is to be seene also in the same Ab∣bey, the Sepulchre of that Ordgar before named: and the huge bignesse of his sonnes tomb, who was called Ordulph, is thought to be a rare thing worth the sight: for he was a man of a mighty stature giant like, and of exceeding great strength, as who was able to burst in sun∣der the bars of great gates, and to stride over the rivelet there, ten foote broad ; if ye list to believe the said William. But scarcely had this Abbey stood thirty yeare after it was first founded, when the Danes in their spoyling rage burnt it to the ground: yet it flou∣rished againe, and by a laudable ordinance, lectures therein were kept of our anci∣ent language (I meane the English Saxon tongue) which continued even to our fa∣thers daies; Lectures of the Saxon tongue. for feare lest the said language (a thing that now is well neere come to passe) should be forgotten. Tamar having thus received the Teave, draweth now very neere unto his mouth, where he and the river Plime together fall into the Ocean: of which river the Towne adjoyning to it, Plimmouth. 13. Henry 4. is called Plimmouth: sometime named Sut∣ton: and seemeth to have consisted of two parts. For, we read in the Parliamentary Acts, of Sutton De valle tarta. Vautort, and Sutton Prior, because it belonged partly to the family of the Vautorts, and partly to the Prior. Of late time it became of a poore fisher village to be a great Towne, and for the number of Inhabitants growne to that passe, (as now it is to be seene) that it may bee compared with a Citie. Such is the commodious∣nesse of the haven, which without striking saile admitteth into the bosome thereof the tallest ships that be, & doth harbour them very safely, as well within Tamar as Plime, and beside against hostilitie sufficiently fortified: For, before the very midst of the ha∣vens mouth, lieth S. Michaels Isle, strongly fortified both by nature, and art: as for the haven it selfe at the very Towne, it hath fortifications on both sides, and is chained over when need requireth, having on the South side a Pier against it, and upon an hill next adjoyning a Castle built, as it is thought, by the Valle tortis, ive de valle torta. Vautorts. The whole Towne is divided into foure Custodias. Wards, governed by a Praetor. Major, ordained there by K. Henry the Sixth, and under him every ward had in times past a Captaine set over it, each of them likewise had his inferiour officers. As touching that fabulous wrestling betweene Corinaeus, Gogmagog. and Gogmagog the Giant in this place, let it suffice to set downe a verse or two out of Architrenius concerning the same, and the Westerne Giants. Hos, auidum belli robur Corinaeus Averno Praecipitis misit, cubitis ter quatuor altum Gogmagog Herculeâ suspendit in aere luctâ; Anthaeum{que} suum scopulo detrusit in aequor. Potavitque dato Thetis ebria sanguine fluctus, Diuisum{que} tulit mare corpus, Cerberus umbram. These martiall monsters, Giants strong, by Corinaeus slaine; With Gogmagog twelve cubits high, a combat did remaine: Whom up he hang'd twixt heaven and earth, (thus once Alcides hung Antaeus fell) and from the rock into the Sea him flung. His bloud gave Thetis the waves to drinke (her selfe therewith was drunke) His grisly ghost had Cerberus, when body torne was sunke. As for that rock, from whence, they say, this Giant was cast down, it is now called the Haw: a very hill standing between the Town and the Ocean: on the top whereof, which lieth spred into a most pleasant plaine, there is a right delectable, and goodly prospect every way, and for the use of Sailers a very faire Compasse erected. The cir∣cuit of this Town not great, but much renowned it is among forraine nations: and not so much for the commodious haven, as the valour of the Inhabitants in sea services of all sorts. Francis Drake. For (to say nothing of all others) from hence was Sir Francis Drake that fa∣mous Knight, and most skilfull man at sea in our daies; who first (as I have heard himselfe relate) to repaire the losses which he had sustained at the Spaniards hands, for two yeares space together with victorious successe held and kept the Bay of Mexico as it were besieged, and travailed over the Narrow passage. Isthmus of Dariena: From whence when he had once beheld the South sea (as the Spaniards call it) as another Themistocles stirred up with the Trophees of Miltiades, thought hee should have neglected him∣selfe, his country, and his owne glory, unlesse he sailed over it, which continually pre∣sented it selfe as an object to his adventurous mind. In the yeare therefore 1577. put∣ting to sea from hence, he entred into the streits of Magellan, and in two yeares and ten moneths, through many alternative varieties of fortune, God being his guide, and valour his consort, was the next after Magellanus, that sailed round about the world. Whereupon, one wrote thus unto him. Drake, pererrati novit quem terminus orbis, Quem{que} semel mundi vidit uter{que} polus. Si taceant homines, facient te sidera notum, Sol nescit comitis immemor esse sui. Sir Drake, whom well the worlds end knows, which thou did'st compasse round: And whom both poles of heaven once saw, which North and South doe bound: The Starres above will make thee knowne, if men here silent were, The Sunne himselfe cannot forget his fellow-travailler. The rest of his noble exploits, and of others who descended from hence taking ex∣ample by him, flourished in glorious atchivements by sea, seeing it belongs not to this place, let Historians record in writing. Neither have I ought else to say more of this Towne, but that in the raigne of William Rous. Rufus, there flourished heere one Ealphege, a learned and married Priest. For, untill the yeare 1102. Priests in England were not forbidden to have their wives. The first ti that Priests were forbid∣den marriag Then, Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury violently forced both the sacred Scripture, and nature also, as our writers in those daies doe complaine, and namely, Henry of Huntingdon expresly of Anselme in these termes: He prohibited English Priests to have wives, who before-time were not prohibited. Which, as some thought to be a matter of greatest puritie: so others againe tooke it to be most perilous, lest while by this meanes they aimed at cleannesse above their power, they should fall into horrible uncleannesse, to the exceeding great shame of Christianitie. More inward in the country, and yet not farre from the water of Plim, is Plimpton seated, a mercate Towne, well frequented, where the remnants, and deformed ruines of a Castle shew themselves: of which many men have holden as our Lawyers terme it, in Castle guard ; for it was the chiefe seat of the Redversies, or the Riparii, (for both we read) who were Barons of Plimpton, and Earles of Denshire. Next unto this, stood Plimpton S. Mary, the glorie whereof then fell to decay, when as not long since the Colledge there of Canons was dissolved, which William Warlewast, Bishop of Ex∣ceter, in old time had founded. More, Eastward you see Modburie, a little Towne, which acknowledgeth it selfe to appertaine to the ancient and right worshipfull fa∣mily of the Campernulphs, Knights, who also are called in old Deeds De campo Ar∣nulphi, but commonly Champernouns, which received much advancement and repu∣tation by the heire of the Uautorts. From Plims mouth, Stert Caud in Dutch a Taile. where the South shore of this region beginneth, the countrey runneth along with a large and great front as farre as to Stert, a cape or promontorie (for, so the word in the English Saxon tongue signifieth) but so soone as the shore hath drawne it selfe back land-ward, the river Dert breaketh out, which arising from the inward part of the country runneth downe apace, through certaine leane and high grounds, called thereupon Dertmore, (wherein of late were Lode stones found) and carrieth downe with it certaine grit, and sand out of the Tin-mines, (which by little and little choke up the channell) through the Forrest of Dortmore, where David of Sciredun held lands in Sciredun, and Siplegh, by this tenure or service, to find two ar∣rowes, when the King his soveraigne Lord should come to hunt in that Forrest: From thence by Dertinton ▪ a Baronie sometimes of the Martins, who were Lords of Keimes in Wales, Totnes. it holdeth in his streame unto Totnes. Which being an ancient lit∣tle Towne standing pendant upon the fall of an hill, East, and West, flourished some∣time in great honour. It paid no Non geld tribute, as we find in Doomesday, the survey-book of England, but when Exceter paid; and then it yielded xl. d. and did service, if any expediti∣on marched by land, or went by sea: and Totnes, Barnestaple and Lidford served and paid, as much as Exceter. King John granted unto it power to chuse a Major for the chiefe Magistrate: Edward the First enriched it with sundry liberties; and about that time it was fortified with a Castle by the Zouches, as the Inhabitants are perswaded. The possession it was in times past of one Iudaël, surnamed De Totnais ; afterwards of William Briwer a right noble personage, by one of whose daughters it came to the Breoses, and from them by a daughter likewise to George De Cantlow. Cantelupo, Lord of A∣bergeveny, whose sister Melicent wedded unto Eudo De la Zouch, Lord Zo called usu brought it in by her marriage to the family of the Barons La Zouches: and theirs it was, untill that John, Lord Zouch being attaint and proscribed, because hee tooke part with King Richard the Third, Henry the Seventh bestowed it franckly (as I have heard say) upon Peter Edgecombe a noble and wise gentleman. Adjoyning to this towne is Berie Pomerie, so called of the Pomeries a right noble house in those parts, which a little more East∣ward, and somewhat farther from the river side, had a very proper Castle of their owne. These derive their pedigree from Radulph Pomerie, who in William Conque∣rors time held Wich, Dunwinesdon, Brawerdine, Pudeford, Horewood, Toriland, Hele∣com, and this Berie, &c. Of this Totnes, the strond or shore adjoyning, was called in old time Totonese: where (as the British Historie saith) Brutus the founder of the British nation first landed, and Havillanus, as a Poet, relying thereon versified in this wise: Inde dato cursu, Brutus comitatus Achate, Gallorum spoliis cumulatis navibus aequor Exarat, & superis, aura{que} faventibus usus, Littora foelices intrat Totonesia portus. Thence hoising sailes with Gaulish spoiles the fleet fraight sea doth take Our Brutus with his trustiest friend; and through waves way doth make: The Gods lookt cheerefull on his course, the wind he had at will; At Totnesse shore, that happy haven, arriv'd he and stood still. But, that river Dert, whereof I spake, having passed beyond Totnes bridge, at which it leaveth whole heape of sands brought downe by his streame from out of the Tin mines, hath for prospect on both sides, nothing but fruitfull fields, untill hee come all weary with his long course, to his mouth; over which upon an hill reaching forth in length, Dertmouth. standeth Dertmouth a Port Towne, by reason of the commodious haven, defended with two Castles, much frequented with Merchants and furnished with very good shipping. A Major it hath, by the grant of King Edward the Third. For Lords it acknowledged long since the Zouches, Nicolas of Teukesbury, and the Bri∣ents, according to the variable change of the times: and hath sundry times defended it selfe stoutly against the French: but especially in the yeare of Christ 1404. Mon∣sieur De Castell, a Frenchman, who by his men of warre and piracies had stopped all intercourse of traffique in those parts, and burnt Plimmouth, whiles hee invaded this place, was by women, and country people intercepted, and slaine with all his compa∣nie. And heere I must not passe over in silence Stoke Fleming that lieth hard by, Stoke Fle∣ming. and which taking that name of a noble man of Flanders, sometime Lord thereof, came by the daughter of Mohun to the Carewes. From this place, as the shore giveth backe Northward, the sea followeth in upon it, and by that meanes with a large and spacious creeke, which taketh about ten miles in circuit maketh a bay, called now Torbay: a very safe rode and harbour for ships when the South-west wind is aloft; Briew. and hath fast by it a little village so called, where sometime the Briewrs dwelt, and built a religious house, who in the daies of King Ri∣chard the First, See Sommer∣setshire. and King John, were men of great renowne and revenue: and after∣ward the habitation it was of the Wakes. Neere unto it is Cockington, where the fami∣ly of the Caries (a different house from that of the Carewes) hath flourished a long time in great honour and estimation; Carie of Cockington. out of which the Barons of Hunsdon, concerning whom I will speake more in due place, are descended. A little higher appeares in sight Hacombe, Hacombe. the habitation in old time of Sir Iordan Fitz-Stephen Knight, surnamed of this place, de Hacombe: by whose daughter and heire Cecilie, it came into the fami∣lie of the Archdeacons ; From which likewise by Hugh Courtney in processe of time, it was devolved upon the Carewes, The familie of the Carews. whose house in these parts is reputed very wor∣shipfull, and spred into many branches. For, Jane the daugther of the said Hugh, and heire to her mother, being joyned in mariage to Nicolas Baron Carew, brought him many children: and when the eldest of them, named Thomas, used not his mother with such dutifull respect as a sonne ought, she made a conveyance of that great, and wealthy inheritance to her three younger sonnes (from whom those three families of the Carews, de Hacombe, Anthony, and Bery are sprung) and to Iohn Vere, a sonne that she had by a second husband, from whom the Earles of Oxford are issued. Then meet you with Teignemouth a little village at the mouth of the river Teigne, whereof it hath also the name: where the Danes that were sent before to discover the scituation of Britaine, Danes when they first en∣tred Britaine. and to sound the landing places, being first set a shore about the yeare of Salvation 800. and having slaine the governour of the place, tooke it as an ominous good token of future victorie; which indeed afterward they followed with extreme crueltie through the whole Island. More inward, neere unto the source of the river Teigne is Chegford seated, where flourished sometime the noble family of the Prows: then Chidley, which gave the name to that great house, and linage of the Chidleyes: and next unto the very mouth thereof, Bishops Teignton, so called because it belonged to the Bishops; in which because there was a Sanctuarie, Iohn Grandison descended out of Burgundy, Bishop of Exceter, as presaging what would ensue in future time built a very faire house, to the end that his Successors (these are the very words of his testament) might have a place whereon to leane, and lay their heads, if happi∣ly their Temporalities should be seized into the Kings hands. But so farre was it off that his purpose tooke effect, that his successors have not onely lost that house, but also beene quite desseized now well neere of all the rest. About six miles from thence, the river The River Ex. Isc, whereof Ptolomee maketh mention, which the Britaines call Isc, and the English-Saxons Ex, with a large channell run∣neth into the Ocean. Whether it tooke this name of Iscaw, that signifieth in the Bri∣tish tongue Elders trees, I wot not. Some fetch it from Reeds, which the Britaines call Hesk, Plinie. wherewith Northerne nations, (and such are the Britaines) thatched, and covered their houses, yea and fastened together, as it were, with soder, the joynts of their ships. But considering that there be no reeds heere found, I am not hasty to give credit thereto. This river hath his head, and springeth first in a weely, and bar∣ren ground named Exmore, neere unto Severn sea, a great part whereof is counted within Sommersetshire: Anticke stones. and wherein, there are seene certaine monuments of anticke worke, to wit, Stones pitched in order, some triangle wise, others in a round circle: and one among the rest with an Inscription in Saxon letters, or Danish rather, to di∣rect those (as it should seeme) who were to travaile that way. Now this Ex or Isc be∣ginning his course first from thence Southward by Twifordton, Tiverton. so called of two foords, but commonly Teverton, a Towne standing much upon clothing, to the great gaine, and credit thereof, passeth forward through a faire country of good, and fertile fields, and is augmented with two especial rivelets, Creden from the West, and Columb from the East. Upon Creden in the Primitive Church of the Saxons, there flouri∣shed an Episcopall See, in a Towne of the same name, anciently called Cridiantun, now by contraction Kirton: where that Winifride or Boniface was borne, who converted the Hessians, Thuringers, and Frisians of Germany unto Christ, and for that was ac∣counted the Apostle of Germany, and canonized a Saint. At this present, it is of no great reckoning, but for a small market, and the Bishop of Exceter his house there: but within our fathers remembrance of much greater name, and request it was for a Colledge there of twelve Prebendaries, who now are all vanished and gone. The river Columb that commeth from the East, passeth hard by Columbton, a little Towne bearing his name: which King Alfred by his Testament, bequeathed to his younger sonne: Poltimore. and neere unto Poltimore the seate of that worshipfull, and right ancient family of Bampfield, Ex. intermingleth it selfe with the waters of Ex. And now by this time, Isc or Ex growing bigger, and sporting himselfe, as it were, with spreading into many streames, very commodious for mils, hieth apace, and commeth close to the Citie of Excester, unto which he leaveth his name: whereupon Alexander Necham writeth thus, in his Poem of Divine sapience: Exoniae fama celeberimus Iscianomen Praebuit, — To Excester, Ex a River of fame (First Iscia call'd) impos'd the name. This Citie Ptolomee calleth ISCA, Antoninus ISCA DVNMONIORVM, for DAN∣MONIORVM; others (but falsely) Augusta, as if the second Legion Augusta had there beene resident; Whereas, wee shall shew hereafter that it kept station, and residence in Caer Leon or Vske in Monmouth shire. Excester. ISCA SILVRVM. The English Saxons termed it , and Monketon, of the Monks, at this day it is called Excester, in Latine Exonia, in British Caerisk, Cae∣auth, and Pencaer, that is, a head or principall Citie. For Caer, (to tell you once for all) with our Welchmen. Caer, what it signifieth. Britans is as much to say, as a Citie, whereupon they use to name Jeru∣salem, Caer Salem; Lutetia or Paris, Caer Paris; Rome, Caer Ruffaine. Thus Carthage in the Punick tongue, was called, as Solinus witnesseth, Cartheia, that is, the new Citie. I have heard likewise, that Caer in the Syriack tongue, signified, a Citie. Now seeing that the Syrians, as all men confesse, peopled the whole world with their Colonies, it may seeme probable, that they left their tongue also to their posteritie, as the mother of all future languages. This Citie, as saith William of Malmesbury, albeit the soile ad∣joyning bee wet, foule and wealie, scarce able to bring forth hungry oates, and many times emptie huskes without graine in them, yet by reason of the statelinesse of the place, the riches of the Inhabitants, and frequent concourse of strangers, all kind of traffique, and com∣merce of merchants is there so fresh, that a man can aske there for no necessary, but hee may have it. Scituate it is on the Eastward banke of the river Ex, upon a little hill gently arising with an easie ascent to a pretty heighth, the pendant whereof lieth East, and West, environed about with ditches, and very strong walles, having many turrets orderly interposed, and containeth in circuit a mile and a halfe, having suburbs run∣ning out a great way on each side. In it there are xv. Parish-Churches, and in the very highest part thereof, neere the East gate, a Castle called Rugemont, sometime the seat of the West Saxon Kings, and afterwards of the Earles of Cornwall: but at this day commended for nothing else, but the antiquitie and scituation thereof. For it commandeth the whole Citie, and territorie about it, and hath a very pleasant pro∣spect into the sea. In the East quarter of the City, is to be seen the Cathedrall Church in the midst of many faire houses round about it, founded as the private history of the place witnesseth, by King Athelstan in the honour of Saint Peter, and replenished with Monks: which Church at length Edward the Confessor after he had remoo∣ved some of the Monks from thence to Westminster, and translated thither the Bi∣shops Sees of Cornwall, and Kirton, adorned with Episcopall Dignitie, and made Leofrike the Britan first Bishop there: whose Successours augmented the Church both with Edifices, and also with revenues: and William Bruier the ninth Bishop af∣ter him, when the Monks were displaced, brought in a Deane, and twentie and foure Prebendaries. In which age flourished Joseph Iscanus borne heere, and from hence taking his surname, a Poet of most excellent wit, whose writings were so well ap∣proved, as that they had equall commendation with the works of ancient Poets: For, his Poem of the Trojan war, was divulged once or twice in Germanie under the name of Cornelius Nepos. Cornel. Nepos. When this Citie Excester. Isca came under the Roman Jurisdiction it appeareth not for certaine: For, so farre off am I from thinking that Vespasian wonne it, (as Geffrey of Monmouth affirmeth) what time as he warring in Britaine under Claudius the Em∣perour, was shewed by the Destinies unto the world, that I thinke it was then scarce∣ly built. Yet in the time of the Antonines, it may seeme to have beene well knowne: for hither, and no farther this way did Antonine specifie any place in his way-faring book. It came not fully to the English-Saxons hands before the 465. yeare after their entrance into Britain. William Malmesbury. For, at that time Athelstane expelled the Britans quite out of the Citie, who before had inhabited it in equall right with the Saxons, yea, and drave them beyond Tamar, and then fortified the Citie round about with a rampire, and wall of fouresquare stone, and other bulwarks for defence. Since which time, ma∣ny benefits by the Kings have beene bestowed upon it, and among the rest, as we read in William the Conquerours Domesday. booke, This Citie paide no tribute, but when London, Yorke, and Winchester paide, and that was halfe a marke of silver for a souldiers service. And when there was any expedition set out either by sea or land, it served in proportion to five hides. It hath beene likewise from time to time much afflicted, once spoiled and sore shaken, by the furious outrages of the Danes, in the yeare of our redemp∣tion 875. but most grievously by Suen the Dane in the yeare 1003. at which time by the treacherie of one Hugh a Norman Governor of the citie, it was raced and ruined along from the East gate to the West. And scarcely began it to flourish againe, when William the Conquerour, most straightly beleaguered it: when the Citizens in the meane while thought it not sufficient to shut their gates against him, but malapart∣ly let flie taunts, and flouts at him: but when a piece of their wall fell downe, by the speciall hand of God, as the Historians of that age report, they yielded immediatly thereupon. At which time, as we find in the said survey-booke of his, The King had in this Citie three hundred houses: it paid fifteene pounds by the yeare, and fortie houses were destroyed after that the King came into England. After this it was thrice besieged, and yet it easily avoided all: First, by Hugh Courtney Earle of Denshire in that civill warre betweene the two houses of Lancaster and Yorke: then, by Perkin Warbecke that imaginarie, counterfeit and pretended Prince, who being a young man of a very base condition, faining himselfe to be Richard Duke of Yorke, the second sonne of King Edward the Fourth, stirred up dangerous stirres against Henrie the Seventh: thirdly, by seditious Rebels of Cornwall, in the yeare of Christ 1549: at which time the Citizens, most grievously pinched though they were with scarcitie of all things, continued neverthelesse in their faith and allegeance, untill that Iohn Lord Russell, raised the siege, and delivered them. But Excester received not so great damage at these enemies hands, as it did by cer∣taine dammes, which they call Weares, that Edward Courtney Earle of Denshire, taking high displeasure against the Citizens, made in the river Ex, which stop the passage so, that no vessell can come up to the Citie; but since that time all mer∣chandize is carried by land from Topesham three miles off. And albeit it hath beene decreed by Act of Parliament, Weare. to take away these Weares, yet they continue there still. Hereupon, the little Towne adjoyning is call Weare, being aforetime named, Heneaton: which was sometime the possession of Augustine de Baa: from whom in right of inheritance it descended to Iohn Holland, who in his signet which my selfe have seene bare a Lion rampant, Ch. 24. Ed. 3 gardant among flowers de Lys. The civill govern∣ment of this Citie is in the power of foure and twenty persons: out of whom there is from yeare to yeare a Major elected; who with foure Bailiffes ruleth heere the State. As touching the Geographicall description of this place, the old tables of Oxford have set downe the longitude thereof to bee nineteene degrees, and eleven scruples: the latitude fiftie degrees, and fortie scruples or minutes. This Citie; Dukes of E cester. that I may not omit so much, hath had three Dukes. For, Richard the Second of that name, King of England, created Iohn Holland Earle of Huntingdon and his brother by the mothers side, the first Duke of Excester: whom Henrie the Fourth deposed from this dignitie, and left unto him the name onely of Earle of Hun∣tingdon: and soone after for conspiracie against the King he lost both it and his life by the hatchet. Some few yeares after, Henry the Fifth set in his place Thomas Beaufort of the house of Lancaster, See the Ear of Dorset. and Earle of Dorset, a right noble and worthy warriour. When he was dead leaving no issue behind him, John Holland sonne of that aforesaid John, (as heire unto his brother Richard who died without children, and to his father both) being restored to his bloud, by the favour and bounty of King Henry the Sixth recovered his fathers honor; and left the same to Henry his sonne, who so long as the Lancastrians stood upright, flourished in very much honor; but af∣terwards when the family of Yorke, was a float and had rule of all, gave an example to teach men, how ill trusting it is to great Fortunes. For this was that same Henry, Duke of Excester, Philip Comi us, cap. 50. who albeit he had wedded King Edward the Fourth his sister, was driven to such miserie, that he was seene all tottered, torne, and barefooted to begge for his living in the Low countries. And in the end after Barnet field fought, wherein he bare himselfe valiantly against Edward the Fourth, was no more seene, untill his dead bodie (as if he had perished by Shipwracke) was cast upon the shore of Kent. A good while after this, Henry Courtney, Earle of Denshire, the sonne of Ka∣tharine daughter to King Edward the Fourth, was advanced to the honour of Mar∣quesse of Excester by Henry the Eighth, Marquesse of Excester. and designed heire apparant. But this Mar∣quesse as well as the first Duke was by his high parentage, cast into a great tempest of troubles, wherein as a man subject to suspitions, and desirous of a change in the State, he was quickly overthrowne. And among other matters because he had with money, and counsell assisted Reginald Poole (afterwards Cardinall) then a fugitive; practising with the Emperour and the Pope, against his owne Country, and the King who had now abrogated the Popes authoritie; he was judicially arraigned, and being condem∣ned, with some others, 1605. lost his head. But now of late by the favour of King Iames, Thomas Cecill Lord Burleigh, enjoyeth the title of Earle of Excester, a right good man, and the worthy sonne of so excellent a father, being the eldest sonne of William Cecill Lord Burleigh, high Treasurer of England, whose wisedome for a long time was the support of peace, and Englands happy quietnesse. From Excester, going to the very mouth of the River, I find no monument of Antiquitie, but Exminster, sometime called Exanminster, bequeathed by King El∣fred to his younger sonne; Pouderham. and Pouderham Castle built by Isabell de Redvers or Rivers. Ripariis, the seat long time of that most noble family of the Courtneys, Knights: who being lineally descended from the stocke of the Earles of Denshire, and allied by affinitie to most honorable houses, flourish still at this day, most worthy of their descent from so high Ancestors. Under Pouderham, Ken a pretty brooke entreth into Ex, which riseth neere Holcombe, Holcombe. Burnet. where in a Parke is a faire place built by Sir Thomas Denis, whose family fetcheth their first off-spring and surname from the Danes, and were ancient∣ly written Le Dan Denis, by which name the Cornish called the Danes. But lower upon the very mouth of the river on the other banke side, as the name it selfe doth testifie, Exmouth. standeth Exanmouth ; knowne by nothing else but the name, and for that some fishermen dwelt therein. Otterey. More Eastward, Otterey, that is, The River of Otters, or River-Dogs, which we call Otters, as may appeare by the signification of the word, falleth into the sea; which runneth hard under Honnyton, Honnyton. a Towne not unknowne to those that travell into these parts, and was given by Isabell, heire to Earles of Devonshire, to King Edward the First, when her issue failed: and doth import his name to certaine places. Among which these are of greatest note: above Honnyton, Mohuns Ottery, the possession in times past of the Mohuns, from whom by right of marriage it came to the Carews: beneath Honyton Saint Maries Otterey, so called of Saint Maries Colledge, which Iohn Grandison Bishop of Excester founded, who drew the whole estates of all the Clergie men in his Diocesse to himselfe. For he perswaded them in their Wils to give up, and make over all that they had unto his hands, as who would bestow the same to godly uses, in endowing Churches, and in building of Hospitals, and Colledges therewith, which verily he (by report) performed accordingly very devoutly. From the mouth of this Otterey, the shore runneth Eastward with many winding reaches, and turning creekes, by Budley, Sidmouth, and Seaton, famous Ports in times past, but now the havens there are so choked up with sand, brought in with the reci∣procall course of the tides, and heaped up against them, that they have almost utter∣ly lost all that benefit. Moridunum. As for Seaton, I would ghesse it to bee that MORIDVNVM, which Antoninus speaketh of, and is placed betweene DVRNOVARIA and ISCA, (if the booke be not faultie) and called in Peutegerius table by a name cut short, RIDV∣NVM, considering both the distance, and the signification of the name. For, Mori∣dunum in the British tongue is the very same that Seaton in English, to wit, A Towne upon an hill by the Sea. Wiscomb. Hereto adjoyneth Wiscomb, a Towne memorable in this respect that in it there dwelt William Lord Bonevill, whose heire Cecilie by her mariage brought the titles of Lord Bonevill, See in Som∣merset shire. and Harington with a goodly inheritance in these parts, unto Thomas Grey Marquesse Dorset. Under these Townes the River Ax dischargeth it selfe at a very small chan∣nell, after it hath passed downe by Ford, where Adelize daughter to Baldwine of Okchampton, Axminster. founded an Abbey for Cistercian Monkes, 1140. and by Axanminster, a Towne renowned in the ancient Histories onely for their Tombes of the Saxon Princes, who were slaine in that bloudy battell at Brunaburg, and translated hither; and scituate it is in the very frontire and limit of this Province. Neere unto which Reginald Mohun of Dunster, unto whom the Mannour of Axminster in right of inhe∣ritance fell by the Fourth daughter of William de Briewr, The Register of Newen∣ham. built the Abbey of Newen∣ham in the yere of Grace 1246. Hence the East-bound runneth crookedly north-west∣ward, by villages of no fame toward Severn side; along w ch now let us take our way. From Cornwall the first shore in this shire that stretcheth out it selfe in length to the Severn Sea, Hercules his Promontory. is by Ptolomee called, THE PROMONTORIE OF HERCVLES, and retaineth still some little remnant of that name, being called at this day Herty∣poinct, and hath in it two pretty townes, Herton, and Hertlond, famous in old time for the reliques of that holy man Saint Nectan. Saint Nectan. In honour of whom there was erected heere a little Monasterie, by Githa Earle Goodwins wife, who had this Nectan in especiall reverence, William of Malmesbury. for that she was perswaded, that for his merits her husband had escaped the danger of shipwracke in a violent and raging tempest. Howbeit after∣wards, the Dinants, who also are named Dinhams, that came out of Bretagne in France, whose demeans, as in ee it was, were counted the founders thereof: and from them descended Baron Dinham, Dinham. Lord high Treasurer of England, under K. Henry the Se∣venth, by whose sisters, and heires, the inheritance was divided between Lord Zouch, Bourchier Fitz-warin, Carew, and Arundell. The name of this Promontorie hath given credit to a very formall tale, That Hercules (forsooth) came into Britaine, Whether ever Hercules came into Britaine. and vanquished here I wot not what Giants. But if it be true as Expounders of Morall Tales. Mythologers affirme, that there was never any Hercules, but that by him the power of humane wisedome is understtod, whereby wee overcome pride, lust, envie, and such like monsters: or if, according to the Gentiles divinitie, by Hercules they meane the Sunne, and by those twelve Labours, endured and per∣formed by Hercules, the twelve signes of the Zodiack, which the Sunne in his yearely course passeth through; what it is they say, let them looke to it themselves. But for mine owne part, I willingly believe that there was an Hercules, nay, I could be con∣tent to grant with Varro, that there were of them fortie and three, all whose acts were ascribed to that Hercules, who was the sonne of Alcmena; yet can I not perswade my selfe, that ever Hercules came hither, unlesse haply hee sailed over the Ocean in that Cup which God Nerius had given him, whereof Athenaeus maketh mention. But you will say, that Franciscus Philelphus in his Epistles, and Lilius Giraldus in his Hercules, averre no lesse. Pardon mee, I pray you; these latter writers may well moove mee, but they are not able to remoove mee, considering that Diodorus Si∣culus, who went on with the Greekish historie in order, even from the most remote, and first records of all Antiquitie, in plaine termes affirmeth, that neither Hercules, nor Father Bacchus went ever into Britaine. I am therefore verily perswaded, that the name of Hercules even to this place, came either through the vanitie of Greekes, or from the superstitious Religion of Britaines. For, as these beeing a most warlike Nation themselves, had valiant men in marvellous admiration, and as highly esteemed of such as vanquished Monsters: so, the Greekes againe, what∣soever was any where stately, and magnificent, that they referred to the glory of Hercules: and because hee had beene a great traveller, such as travelled were wont to offer sacrifice unto him; and to him likewise consecrate the places where they first arrived. Hereof came Hercules-rocke in Terra di La∣viro. Campania, Hercules Hauen in Riviera di Genoa. Liguria, Her∣cules Grove in Germanie: hence likewise, the Promontories of Hercules in Mauritania, Galatia, and Britaine. As the shore giveth backe againe from this Promontorie of Hercules, the two Rivers, Towridge, and Taw, which are the onely Rivers in this north part of the Coun∣tie, discharge themselves into the sea at one mouth. Towridge springing not farre from Henry poinct above said, runneth South-Eastward, and taking into him the river Ock, whereof Ock-hampton a little market towne tooke the name, where Baldwine the Vicount had his Castle in William the Conquerour time (as appeareth out of Domesday booke) from whom it descended to the Courtneys; suddenly turning his channell maketh way Northward, Poderidge. insulating in a manner Potheridge the Mansion of the Familie, surnamed, Monke. Happily for that some one of them being a professed Monke by dispensation to continue his house, returned to temporall state; as that Noble house in France surnamed Archevesque, that is, Archbishop, tooke that name to continue the memorie that one of the Progenitours of an Archbishop, re∣turned by dispensation to be a Temporall man. Certainely, whencesoever the name came, it is ancient, and they have worshipfully matched, and not long since with one of the daughters of Arthur Plantagenet, Vicount Lisley, naturall sonne to King Ed∣ward the Fourth. Hence Towridge hastneth to Tourington ▪ which it giveth name unto, Bediford. standing over it in a great length upon the brow of a little hill: by Bediford al∣so, a towne of right good name for the frequent resort of people, and number of Inha∣bitants, as also for a goodly stone bridge, with arched worke, where straight waies it windeth it selfe into the Taw. This Taw breaking forth out of the very midst and hart of the shire, first runneth downe by Chimligh a little market towne, not far from Chet∣tlehampton a small Village, where Hyertha, canonized a Shee-Saint, lay interred: from thence having passed by Tawton, where Werstane, and Putta, the first Bishops of Denshire had their See, about the yeare of our Lord 906. and Tawstoke over a∣gainst it, Iohn Hooker of the Bishops of Excester. Berstable. now the seate of the right honourable Earle of Bathe, it maketh haste to Berstaple. Reputed this is a very ancient Towne, and for elegant building, and frequen∣cie of people held chiefe in all this coast, scituate amidst hilles in forme of a semicircle upon the river, being as it were, a diameter. Which River at every change and full of the Moone, by the swelling of the Ocean, overfloweth the fields so, as the very Towne it selfe seemeth to be a demie Island: but when, (as one saith) Se aequor re∣fundit in quor. the sea reengor∣geth it selfe backe againe into the sea, it is so shallow, creeping betweene sands and shelves, as it hardly beareth smaller vessels. On the south side it hath a stately bridge built by one Stamford a Citizen of London: In the North part, where North Ewe a little river or brooke runneth, are seene the reliques of a Castle, which by the com∣mon report, King Athelstane, but (as others say) Iudaël of Totenais built: for the kee∣ping, and defence whereof certaine Lands adjoyning thereabout, are held in Castle∣guard. It had sometimes a wall about it, but now there remaine scarce any small to∣kens thereof: The said Iudaël of Totenais received it in free gift in fee of King Willi∣am the First: after him the Tracies held it for a long time: then, the Martins: after whom in the raigne of King Richard the Second, it came to Iohn Holland Earle of Huntingdon, who afterwards was Duke of Excester; and last of all it fell to the Crowne. But Queene Mary gave the Mannour to Thomas Marrow, whose son sold it away. In K. William the First his daies, as we find in Domesday booke, It had with∣in the Burgh fortie Burgesses, and nine without. King Henrie the First, endowed it with many priviledges, and King John with more. A Major, and two Bailiffes for a long time it had: but Queene Mary ordained there a Major, two Aldermen, and a Coun∣sell of twentie and foure. The Inhabitants (for the most part) are Merchants, who in France, and Spaine trade, and traffique much. Neither must this be passed over with silence, that out of this Towns-Schoole, their issued two right learned men, and most renowned Divines, John Jewell. Thomas Har∣ding. John Jewell Bishop of Sarisbury, and Thomas Harding the pub∣like professour in Lovain, who most hotly contended, and wrote learnedly one against the other, concerning the truth of Religion. Ralege. From hence, the river Ta saluting (as it were) Ralegh, which in times past had noble Lords of that name, but now is the possession of a right worshipfull house, sur∣named Chichester: and afterwards encreased by Towbridge water, falleth into the Se∣verne Sea, Kinvith. but it mee eth nor with Kinwith Castle, whereof Asserius maketh men∣tion. For, here abou such a Castle there was of that name, for scite of the ground about it, very safe on every side, save onely on the East quarter: at the which in the yeare of Christ, 70. Hubba the Dane, who with many slaughters and overthrowes had harried the English Nation, was (with many other Danes) slaine. And thereupon the place afterwards was called by our Historiographers; Hubbestow. And then it was that the Englishmen wan the Danes banner, The Danes Banner. called, Reafan. Which, I note there∣fore the rather, because it may be gathered out of a pretty tale in Asserius Meneven∣ is, who hath delivered these things in writing, that the Danes bare in their Ensigne a Raven wrought (by report) in needle-worke, by the daughters of Lothbrooke, that is, Leather-breech, the Dane, with such an opinion of good lucke, as they thought that it never should be wonne. After this, nothing there is to bee seene upon this coast but Ilfarcomb, a good and sure rode for ships, and Comb-Marton bordering hard upon it: under which, old mines of lead, not without veines of silver, have of late beene discovered. As for this word Comb, Comb, what i signifieth. Nicotius. (to observe so much once for all) which is an usuall adjection to names of pla∣ces in this tract, it signifieth, a low scituation, or a Vale: and derived it may seeme to be of Kum a British word, that betokeneth the same: and the French men in their tongue retaine it still in the very same sense, from the ancient Gallique language, the same with old British. More South-East from hence, Bampton. and neere unto Somersetshire Bampton, sometimes Baentun, sheweth it selfe: which under William the Conquerour befell unto Walter de Doway, Paganelli, or Painels. with other right large and faire lands else-where: of whose posteritie Iuli∣ana an Inheritrix, married to William Paganell, commonly Paynell, bare Fulconem. Fulk de Bampton: and he begat William, and Christian the wife of Cogan of Ireland whose posteritie succeeded in the possession thereof; for that the issue of the said William died without children. But from the Cogans, the possession descended at length he∣reditarily unto the Bourchiers now Earles of Bathe, by an heire of Hancford, who had married likewise an heire of the Lord Fitz-warin. In the prime and infancie of the Normans Empire, Earles of D vonshire. (to say nothing of Hugh the Norman whom Queene Emnia had before time made Ruler over this countrey) King William the First ordained one Baldwine to be the hereditarie Sheriffe, or Vi∣count of Denshire, and Baron of Okchampton: after whom succeeded in that honour Richard his sonne, Register of Ford Abbey. who died without issue male. Then, King Henrie the First, be∣stowed upon Richard de Redvers or Rivers. Redveriis, First Tiverton, and afterwards the honour of Plimp∣ton with other places appurtaining thereto: and consequently created him Earle of Denshire, by granting unto him the third penie of the yearely revenues growing out of the same Coun∣tie. Now the revenue of the Countie which in those daies was due to the King, was not above thirtie marks: out of which, the said Earle tooke unto him for his part, ten markes yearely. After this hee obtained of the said King, the Isle of Wight: whereupon stiled hee was, Earle of Denshire, and Lord of the Isle. Hee had a Sonne named Baldwin, who siding with Maude the Empresse against King Stephen was banished the Realme. Howbeit, Richard his Sonne recovered this honour of his Fathers: and hee left be∣hind him two Sonnes, Baldwin, and Richard, who in order successively were Earles of Denshire, and died without issue. The honour therefore reverted backe againe to their unkle by their fathers side, named, William, surnamed, de Vernon, because he was there borne. This William begat Baldwin, who departed this life before his father: yet before his death, he had begotten of Margaret, daughter to Gwarin Fitz-Gerold, Baldwine the third of that name, Earle of Denshire. This Baldwin had two children, to wit, Baldwin the last Earle out of this family, that died without issue 1261. who changed the Ghryphon, clasping and crushing a little beast, (which mark his Ancestours used in their seale) into a Scutcheon, or with a Lyon rampant, azur, and Called, Is bella de Forti∣bus. Isabell, who being espoused to William Called, Is bella de Forti∣bus. de Fortibus, Earle of Albemarle, bare to him a Sonne, named Thomas, who died soone after, and Avellina a daughter ma∣ried to Edmund Earle of Lancaster, whom she mightily enriched, with the inheri∣tance of her father, and died issulesse. After some time, King Edward the Third, by his letter missive onely, Claus. 9. Edw. tertii. M. 35. . dorso. without any other complement of ceremonies, created Hugh Courtney, Earle of Devonshire, and linked as cousin, and next heire to the said Isabel. For he commanded him by vertue of those missives, to use that title, and by a precept to the high Sheriffe of the Shire, commanded he should be so acknowledged. Regi∣nald Courtney was the first of this family that came into England, brought hither by King Henry the Second, and by him advanced with the marriage of the heire of the Baronie of Okchampton, for that he procured the marriage betweene the said King, and Eleonor his heire of Poictu and Aquitaine. But whether hee was branched from the house of Courtney before it was matched in the bloud royall of France, or after which our Monks affirme, but Du Tillet Keeper of the Records of France doubt∣eth, I may say somewhat in another place. After the first Earle Hugh, succeeded his sonne Hugh; whom Edward his Grand-child, by Edward his Sonne followed, who died before him; and when he died, he left it to his sonne Hugh: and hee likewise to Thomas his sonne, who died in the thirtieth and sixth yeare of King Henry the sixth his raigne. The said Thomas begat three sonnes, namely, Thomas, Henrie, and Iohn: whose estate during the heate of those mortall dissensions betweene the houses of Lancaster and Yorke, was much tossed and shaken, whiles they stood resolutely and stiffely for the Lancastrians. Thomas taken at Towton field, was beheaded at Yorke: Henry his brother, and Successour seven yeares after, dranke of the same cup at Salisburie. 9. Edward the Fourth. And although King Edward the Fourth, advanced Sir Humfrey Staf∣ford of Suthwicke to the Earledome of Denshire, who within three moneths revol∣ting from King Edward his advancer most ingratefully, was apprehended, and with∣out processe executed at Bridg water: yet Iohn Courtney aforesaid, the youngest brother, would not leave this title, but with his life, which hee lost in the battell of Tewksbury. For a long time after, this family lay in some sort obscured: yet under King Henrie the Seventh, it reflourished: for, hee advanced againe Edward Courtney, the next heire male unto the honors of his Progenitors. He begat William Earle of Devonshire, who matched in wedlocke with Katherine, daughter to King Edward the Fourth: of whom he begat Henry Earle of Devonshire, and Marquesse withall of Excester, who under King Henry the Eighth, lost his head, as we have now shewed: whose Sonne Edward was restored againe by Queene Mary, a most noble young Gentleman, and of passing good hope, but he died an untimely death at Padua in Italie: for, the best men (as saith Quadrigarius) are of least continuance. In the fortieth and sixth yeare after his death, 1603. King Iames gave the honorable title of Earle of Devonshire, to Charles Blunt Lord Mountjoy, and Lieutenant Generall of Ireland ; which title he affected, as descended from a Cosin, and heire of Humfrey Stafford Earle of Devonshire. Hee was a worthy personage, as well for martiall prowesse, and ornaments of learning, as for ancient nobilitie of birth: for that he had recovered Ireland into the former good estate, by driving out the Spaniards, and by subduing or enforcing the Rebels to sub∣mission: Him (I say) he created Earle of Devonshire, him hee heaped with favours, and according to the bountifull munificence of a King mightily enriched. But within a small while, death envied him the fruition both of honour and wealth, which hee enjoyed as few yeares, as his Predecessour Humfrey Stafford did moneths. There be contained in this Countie Parish-Churches 394. DVROTRIGES. N Ext unto the Danmonians Eastward, Ptolomy placeth in his Geographicall tables , as hee wrote in Greeke, who in the Latine copies are written DVRO∣TRIGES. The same people were named by the Bri∣taines about the yeare of Salvation 890. Dwr-Gwyr, as saith mine Authour Asserius Menevensis, who lived in that age and was himselfe a Britaine borne. The English-Saxons called them , like as we at this day call this County, the County of Dor∣set, and Dorset-shire. That name DVROTRIGES, being ancient and meere British, may seeme by a very good and probable Etymologie to be derived of DOVR, Dwr what i signifieth. or Dwr, which in the British tongue signifieth Water, and of Trig, that betokeneth an Inhabitant, as if a man would say, dwellers by the water or Sea-side. Neither verily from any other fountaine than from water are we to fetch those names of places in old France or Gaule, which used in times past the very same language that our ancient Britans did, which either begin with Dur, and Dour, or doe end in the same; As for ex∣ample, DVROCASES, DVROCOTTORVM, DVRANIVS, DORDO∣NIA, DVROLORVM, DOROMELLVM, DIVODVRVM, BREVIO∣DVRVM, BATAVODVRVM, GANODVRVM, OCTODVRVM, and a number of that sort, as well in Gaule as in Britaine. As for that English-Saxon word , compounded of both tongues, British and English, it carryeth the same sence and signification that DVROTRIGES doth. For, Setta what i is. with our old Forefathers, like as with the rest of the Germans, soundeth as much as to inhabit or dwell upon. And therefore they termed mountainers in their language Dun- : the Inhabitants of the Chil∣tern-hilles, : the dwellers by the river Arow, : even as the Germans called the Inhabitants of Woods and Forrests Holt∣satten: because they dwelt within or among the Woods. Neither went our Britans from the reason and meaning of the old name, when they termed these DVROTRIGES, of whom we now treat, Dwr-Gweir, that is to say, Men bordering on the Maritime or Sea-coast. For, their country lieth stretched out with a shore full of turnings or windings in, and out, for a long tract, to wit by the space of fiftie miles or there about, full upon the British sea, from West to East. DORSET-SHIRE. T He Countie of Dorset as it is on the Northside bounded with Somersetshire and Wiltshire, on the West with Devonshire and some part of Somersetshire, on the East with Hampshire: so on the South part, where it carrieth the greatest length, it lieth all open to the Sea, bearing upon the British Ocean as I said ere∣while for fiftie miles together or much thereabout. A fruitfull soile it is: The North part thereof being overspred with woods and forrests; from thence garnished with many a greene hill, whereon feede flocks of sheepe in great number with pleasant pastures likewise and fruitfull vallies bearing come: it hath a descent even to the very Sea shore, which in my description I will follow as it leadeth me, for that I can find no better order. In the very entrance into this, out of Denshire the first place that sheweth it selfe on this shore is Lime, Lime. a little towne scituate upon a steepe hill, so called of a small river of the same name running hard by: which scarcely may challenge the name of a Port or Haven towne though it be frequented with fishermen, and hath a rode un∣der it called the Cobbe, sufficiently defended from the force of winds with rocks and high trees. In ancient bookes I can hardly find any mention thereof: onely thus much I have read, that King Kinwulfe in the yeare of our Lord 774. gave (by these words) the land of one Mansion unto the Church of Scireburne, hard by the Wersterne banks of the river Lime, not farre from the place where he hideth the course of his streame within the Sea: to this end, that for the said Church salt might be boyled to the sustaining of mani∣fold necessities, Neere thereunto the river Carr dischargeth it selfe into the Sea, and there standeth Carmouth a little village: Carmouth. where the bold roving Danes having good successe in sea-fights, wonne two victories of the English, first vanquished King Egbert in the yeare of Christ 831. and then eight yeares after King Aethelwolfe. Then there is Burtport, Burtport. or more truly Birtport, placed betweene two small rivers which there meete together: In this towne, in the daies of King Edward the Confessor, there were reckoned one hundred and twenty houses, but in William the Conquerors raigne, as we find in his booke of Doomesday, one hundred and no more. In our time in respect of the soile yeilding the best hemp, and skill of the people for making ropes and cables for ships, it was provided by a speciall statute, to remaine in force for a cer∣taine set time, that ropes for the Navie of England should be twisted no where else. Neither is this place able to maintaine the name of an haven, albeit in the mouth of the river being on both sides enclosed within little hilles, nature seemes as it were of purpose to have begun an haven, and requireth in some sort art and mans helpe to ac∣complish the same. From hence the shore winding in and out shooteth far into the Sea: and a banke called Chesil of sands heaped up thick together (with a narrow frith betweene) lieth in length for nine miles which the South-wind when it is up, Chesill. commonly cutteth a∣sunder and disperseth, but the Northerne wind bindeth, and hardneth againe. By this Banke or Sand-ridge, Portland. Portland, sometime an Island is now adjoyned to the main-land: The reason of which name is altogether unknowne, unlesse it were so called because it lyeth full against the Port Weymouth: but it soundeth more neere unto the truth, that this name was given it of one Port a noble Saxon, who about the yeare of our Salvation 703. infested and sore annoied these coasts. Historie of Winchester. This Portland in the declining state of the Saxons Empire (for before-time writers never spake of it) felt as much as any other place, from time to time, the violent rage of the Danes. But when the Da∣nish warre was ended, it fell to the possession of the Church of Winchester. For, at what time as Emme mother to King Edward the Confessor (whose name was called in question, and she charged for incontinencie with Aldwin Bishop of Winchester) had gone bare-foot upon nine culters red hot in Winchester Church without harme (an unusuall kind of triall in those daies, and then called Ordalium ) and so cleered her selfe of that imputation, that she made her chastitie by so great a miracle more famous to posteritie: She for a memoriall thereof, gave nine Lordships to the Church of Winchester: and King Edward her sonne, repenting that hee had so wrongfully brought his mothers name into question bestowed likewise upon the said Church this Island with other revenues. It is in compasse scarce seven miles, rising up about the sides with high rocks, but lying flat and low in the midst: Inhabited scatteringly heere and there: plentifull enough of corne, and good to feed sheepe: but so scant of woods, that in default of other fewell they make their fire with oxe and cow dung dried. The Inhabitants, of all English-men were the cunningest slingers; and very of∣ten doe find among the weeds or reeds of the sea, Isidis Plocamos, that is, Isis haire, which as Plinie reporteth out of Iuba, is a shrub growing in the Sea not unlike unto Corall without leafe: cut it up it turneth into a black colour, and if it fall, it soone breaketh. On the East-side it hath one onely Church, and very few houses standing close thereto, and on the North a Castle built by King Henry the Eighth, which also defendeth the entrance into the haven of Weimouth. Weymouth. A little towne this is, upon the mouth of Wey a small river; over against which on the other side of the banke standeth Melcomb, surnamed Regis, that is, Kings Melcomb, divided from the other onely by the haven betweene. But the priviledges of the haven were awarded from them by sen∣tence of the Parliament; howbeit afterwards recovered. These stood both sometimes proudly upon their owne severall priviledges, and were in emulation one of another: but now (God turne it to the good of both) many they are by Authoritie of Parliament incorporated into one body, conjoyned of late by a bridge, and growne very much greater, and goodlier in buildings by sea-adven∣tures than heeretofore. From thence the shore stretcheth out directly along by the Isle of Purbeck (as they call it) which for a great part of it is an heath and forrest like indeed replenished with Deere both red and fallow, having also veines of marble running scatteringly heere and there under the ground. In the midst whereof, there is an old large castle named Corf seated upon a great slaty hill, which after a long combat with time somewhat yielded as overcome, unto time, untill of late it hath beene repaired, and is a notable testimony and memoriall of a Stepmothers hatred. A Stepdames hatred, that is, her husbands sonne. For, Aelfrith to make way for her owne sonne Etheldred to the Crowne, when Edward her sonne in law King of England, came to visit her in this castle from his disport of hunting, set some villaines and hacksters to murther him, and like a most wicked Stepdame fed her eies with his bloud. For which deed repenting herselfe when it was too late, she sought afterward maruellously to wash out that sinfull staine, by taking her selfe to the mantle, and ring in the habite of an holy Votarie, and to building religious houses. This Purbeck is cal∣led an Isle, although it be onely a Demy Island, compassed round about with the sea, save onely on the West-side: For, on the East, the sea bendeth the bankes inward, and breaking in at a very narrow straight betweene the two shores (against which a small Isle with a block house called Brensey standeth) maketh a broad and wide bay. On the North side wherof in the said Biland, there standeth over it the towne Poole, so as it is wholly environed with waters except it be on the North-side, where it closeth with the continent & hath one gate and no more leading unto it. We may well thinke it so named, because that bay aforesaid lying under it, in calme weather whē the waters be still resembleth a pond, such as we call a poole in our language. This of a Sedgeplot, & of a few fishermens cotages, in the last foregoing age, grew to be a mercate towne ex∣ceeding rich and wealthy, beautified also with goodly houses: and K. Henry the Sixth by consent of the Parliament granted unto it the priviledges of a port or haven towne which he had taken from Melcomb, and licensed the Major thereof, to wall it about: which worke afterward was begun at the haven, by King Richard the Third, a Prince who deserved to be rancked among the worst men and the best Kings. But ever since that time, by what fatall destinie, I know not, or rather through the idlenesse and sloth of the townesmen, it is decaied: in so much as for want of Inhabitants, the very houses at this day, runne to ruine. Into the West Angle of this Bay falleth the greatest, and most famous river of all this tract; commonly called Frome, but the Eng∣lish-Saxons, as witnesseth Aerius, named it ; whereupon perhaps, for that this Bay was in old time called Fraumouth, the posteritie ensuing rooke the rivers name to be Frome. The head thereof is at Eureshot neere unto the West limit of this shire: From whence he taketh his course Eastward by Frompton, whereto it gave the name, and from the North receiveth a little river running downe by Cerne Ab∣bey: which Augustine the Apostle of the English nation built, when hee had broken there in pieces, Good health. Heil the Idol of the heathen English-Saxons, and chased away the fog of paganish superstition. Here was first bred among the religious men (as I have read) Iohn Morton Cardinall, Morton. and Archbishop of Canterbury borne at S. Andrews Milborne, worthily advanced to so high places for his good service in working Eng∣lands happinesse by the union of the two houses, of Lancaster, and York; and of this family there hath issued both R. Bishop of worcester, and many gentlemen of very good note in this country, and elsewhere. Under this somewhat lower, the Frau or Frome (chuse whether you will) maketh an Island, and so goeth to see that most anci∣ent towne [ Dorchester ] which in Antoninus his Itinerarium is termed DVRNOVARIA, that is, the river Passage or Ferry, and seemeth by Ptolomee to be named untruly, in sundry copies DVRNIVM and DVNIVM. This is the head Towne of the whole Shire, and yet is neither great nor beautifull, being long since despoiled of the walles by the Danes, who raised as it is thought certaine trenches; whereof one is called Maum∣bury being an acre inditched, an other Poundbury somewhat greater: and the third a mile off as a Camp, with five trenches containing some ten acres, called Maiden castle, which a man may easily conjecture to have beene a summer station or campe of the Romans. But of her antiquitie it sheweth daily expresse tokens, namely the Roman causey of the Fosse high way, and coine of the Romans both copper and silver found there, and especially at Fordington hard by which the common people there, call King Dorn his pence, whom by some allusion to the name, they dreame full sweetly, to have beene the founder of the towne. It had anciently a castle in that place where the Grey-friers built their Convent out of the ruines thereof, and hath now but three parish Churches, whereas the compasse of the old towne seemeth to have beene very large. But the most grievous hurt that it tooke, was when Sueno the Dane had in most outrageous crueltie renewed the Danish warre: and Hush the Norman who ruled these countries a man of a persidious and treacherous mind, suf∣fered all to be spoiled and harried. But in what estate it stood soone after the Nor∣mans first comming in, take knowledge if it please you, out of Domesday booke be∣ing the Survey of England. In King Edwards daies there were in Dorchester 170. houses, and these for all the Kings service discharged themselves, and paid according to te Hides: but to the use of Houscarles one marke of silver, excepting the customes which per∣taine ad firmam noctis, that is, to the entertainment of the King for one night. There were in it two Mint Masters. Now there be therein but 82. houses: and one hundreth have beene utterly destroyed since the time of Sheriffe Hugh. If these termes seeme to be very obscure (as Sextus Cecilus said in the like matter) impute it not to the fault of the writers, but to their ignorance who cannot conceive the meaning. From hence Frome runneth by Woodford, where in old time Guy Brient a Baron and renowned warriour had a little Castle of his owne: which afterward was the ha∣bitation of Hugh Stafford of Suthwick ; by one of whose daughters Inheritrices, it came as I have heard to Thomas Strangwaies, who being borne in Lancashire, and brought hither by the first Marquesse Dorset, Strangwaies. obtained a great and rich inheritance in these parts, and his issue built a very faire house at Milbery. Then holdeth hee on his course besides Byndon, in the Saxon tongue , which also had a monasterie, where Kinegilsus in the yeare 614. in a doubtfull, and dangerous battell vanquished the Britaines. Not long since it was the seat of the Lord Marney: now it giveth the honourable title of Vicount unto the Lord Thomas Howard Knight of the order of S. George: whose father Thomas the second sonne of Thomas Howard, the second of that name Duke of Norfolk, Bindon. Queene Elizabeth created Vicount Howard of Bindon, when he having matched in marriage with the daughter and heire of Baron Marney, was seized heere of a very great inheritance of the Newborows. Newboroug These who were an∣ciently named de Novo Burgo, and commonly Newboroughs, derive their pedigree from a younger soone of Henry the first Earle of Warwick of the Norman line: and held heere Winfrott, with the whole Hundred of the gift of King Henry the First, per servitium Camerarii (these be the words out of the booke of the Offices) in Capite de Domino Rege: that is, by service of Chamberlaine, in Chef, from our soveraigne Lord the King. Grand Ser∣jeantie. But under Edward the Third I have read, that this was held by Sergeantie, name∣ly, by holding the Laver or Ewre for the King his Soveraigne Lord to wash, upon his Coro∣nation day. Also Raulph Moien held the Mannour of Owres neere adjoyning by service of Serjeantie in the Kitchin, of the gift likewise of King Henry the First: and R. de Welles the Mannour of Welles heereabout, since the Conquest of England, by the service of the Kings Baker. Which I note, onely by the way. Where Frome maketh his issue into that Bay, whereupon Poole is scituate, hard by the very mouth is planted Warham, in the Saxon tongue , a towne strongly seated on every side but Westward, as being fenced on all parts beside, with the rivers Trent, Frome, and the Sea together: In King Edward the Confessors time, it had two Mint maisters: but whiles William the Conquerour raigned it could not reckon above seven dwelling houses in it. Yet afterwards it flourished againe, forti∣fied with the wall, furnished with a mint house, a great number of Inhabitants, and a most strong Castle, which that King William the First built, it continued in a most flourishing state untill the daies of King Henry the Second, who when hee came to challenge the Crowne of England in the yeare 1142, hee arrived heere, besieged and tooke the Castle which was defended by Robert Lacy, against him in behalfe of King Stephen, and afterward Robert of Lincolne a man of mightie possessions in these parts defended the same against King Stephen. But from that time, by occasion part∣ly of warres, and partly of sudden casualtie by fires, by reason also that the sea by lit∣tle and little which draweth the commoditie of an haven, it is almost run to ruine: and in the very heart of the old towne it bringeth forth store of garlick. At this mouth likewise is discharged another small river with Frome, Asserius calleth it Trent, but now the Inhabitants thereby name it Piddle: From the North banke whereof scarce three miles off I saw the ruins of Middleton Abbey, which King Athelstane foun∣ded as a satisfaction to appease the ghost and soule of his brother Edwine, whom hee had deprived both of his Kingdome, and life. For when that solicitous desire of raig∣ning had caused him quite to forget all Justice, hee put the young Prince heire appa∣rant to the Crowne, with one page, into a little whirrey without any tackling or fur∣niture thereto, to the end he might impute his wickednesse to the waves. And so the young Prince overcome with griefe of heart, and unable to master his owne passions; cast himselfe headlong into the sea. Middleton Under this Middleton, there is voided also ano∣ther river, which runneth hard by Bere a little mercate towne, where for a long time, that ancient, and famous family de Turbida villa, commonly, Turbervill had their chief habitation, whereof as some were famous, so Hugh Turburvill in the time of King Edward the First was infamous for his traiterous practises with the French. But to goe backe againe to the West part of the shire: At the spring head of Frome, where the soile is most fruitfull, the forrest of Blackmore sometimes thicke, and full of trees, but now thinner growne, yeildeth plentifull game for hunting. This by a more common, Forrest of White-hart and better knowne name is called The Forrest of white hart. The rea∣son of which name, the Inhabitants by tradition from their forefathers report to be thus. When King Henry the Third came hither to hunt, and had taken other Deere, he spared a most beautifull and goodly White-Hart, which afterwards T. de la-Lynde a gentleman of this countrey with others in his company tooke and killed: but how perillous a matter it was to bee twitching (as they say) of a lion they soone found and felt. For, the King conceived great indignation, and high displeasure a∣gainst them, put them to a grievous fine of money for it, and the very lands which they held, pay even to this day every yeare by way of amercement a piece of money into the Exchequer, White hart silver. Shirburne. which is called White hart silver. There joyneth neere to this forrest Shirburne towne, named also Shirburne Castle, in old time , which by interpretation is Fons Limpidus, or as it is else where writen Fons clarus, that is, Pure fountaine or cleare well, scited on the hanging of an hill, a pleasant and proper seate, as William of Malmesburie saith, as well for the frequent number of Inhabitants, as the sci∣tuation: and now it is the most populous, and best haunted towne of all this country, and gaineth exceeding much by clothing. In the yeare of our redemption 704, an Episcopall seat was heere erected, and Aldelme the first Bishop there consecrated: afterwards also in the raigne of Etheldred, Herman the Bishop of Sunning, having ob∣tained this Bishoprick, translated his Episcopall see hither, and joyned the said Bishop∣rick of Sunning unto this, which under William Conqueror the same Bishop trans∣lated to Sarisburie, and reserved Shirburne to bee a retiring place for his Successors, unto whom it belongeth as yet: And one of them, namely, Roger, built a strong Castle in the East-part thereof, under which lay sometime a wide meere, and many fish pooles: and now being filled up are converted into most pleasant, and rich medow ground. As for the Cathedrall Church, presently upon the translation of the See, it became a monasterie againe, and beareth shew of great antiquitie, although not many became a monasterie againe, and beareth shew of great antiquitie, although not many yeares past, in a broile betweene the townesmen and the Monks it was fired: which the burnt and scorched colour upon the stones doth as yet most evidently shew. Un∣der this, the river Iuell, whereof I will speake some where else, winding in and out with many curving reaches, runneth Westward to Chiston, the seate sometime of the linage de Maulbauch, Chiston. from which it descended hereditarily unto the family of the Hors ies Knights, where it entreth into Sommersetshire. More toward the East the most famous river Stoure passing full of tenches and Eeles especially, arising in Wiltshire out of six fountaines commeth downe to Stour∣ton, the honor and seat of the Barons of Stourton. So soone as it entred in this Shire it passeth through Gillingham forrest, in which Edmund surnamed Iron-side in a memo∣rable battell put the Danes to flight: Shaftsbury. and three miles from thence saluteth Shaftsbury standing upon an hill top, very defective of water, sometimes called by the Britaines as it is commonly, but falsely thought, Caer Paladur, and in Latine by later writers Septonia: by the Saxons , perhaps of the Churches Spire steeple, such as they tearmed Scheafts. A little before the Normans time it had in it 104. houses, and three Mint masters, as we read in that Domesday. booke so often by me alleadged. And af∣terwards, it flourished the more, by reason of a Nunnerie which Elfgiva a most god∣ly and devout Lady▪ wife to Edmund that was King Aelfrids nephews sonne had erected, and of ten parish Churches besides, or there about. But most famous in this place, by occasion of a prety fable that our Historians doe report of Aquila prophe∣cying here of the conversion or change of the Britaines Empire: For, some will have the bird, The prophe∣cy of Aquila. Aquila, that is, an Eagle, others a man so named to have foretold here, that the British Empire after the Saxons and Normans should returne againe to the an∣cient Britaines: and these men affirme and maintaine that this place is of greater an∣tiquitie than Saturne himselfe, whereas most certaine it is, that it was first built by Alfred. For, the Historiographer of Malmesbury hath recorded, that in his daies there was an old stone translated from the ruines of the wall into the Chapter house of the Names, which had this Inscription: ANNO DOMINICAE INCARNATIONIS AELFREDVS REX FECIT HANC VRBEM. DCCC.LXXX. REGNI SVI VIII. That is, In the yeare of the incarnation of our Lord, King Aelfred built this Citie, 880. of his raigne the eighth. This Inscription I have the more willingly put down here for proofe of the Truth, because in all the copies which I have seen it is wanting, save only in that in the Libra∣rie of the late Lord Burghley, high Treasurer of England, and I have beene informed that it continued there untill the time of King Henry the Eighth. Yet the Inhabitants have a tradition that an old Citie stood upon the place which is called the Castle-Greene, and by some, Bolt-bury ; now a faire plaine so scited that as of one side it joyneth to the Towne, so of another it is a strange sight to looke downe to the vale under it: whereby in the West end of the old Chappell of S. Iohn, as I heare now, standeth a Roman Inscription reversed. From thence the Stoure, by Marnhill, of which place L. Henry Howard brother of Thomas last Duke of Norfolke received of King Iames the title of Baron Howard, of Mernhill, before that he was created Earle of Northamp∣ton, makes speed to Stourminster, which is as much to say, as the Monasterie or Min∣ster upon Stoure. A small towne this is, standing somewhat with the lowest: from which there is a stone bridge built reaching to Newton Castle ; where offreth it selfe to be seene a loftie mount cast up (as they say) to that heighth with great labour, but of the Castle there remaineth nothing at all, but onely the bare name. Of these, I have nothing of more antiquitie to say than this, that King Aelfred bequeathed Stoureminster to a younger sonne of his. Hard by, at Silleston there rise two good great hilles, the one named Hameldon, the other Hodde, and both of them fortified with a three fold Ditch and rampier. Barons Fit Payne. And not far from thence (but the very place I cannot precisely set downe) stood Okeford, the Capitall honour of the Baronie of Robert, the sonne of Pagan, commonly named Fitz-Payne, who married the daughter of Guido de Brient, Baron Bri who also in this West part enjoyed the honor of a Baron under King Edward the Third: but for default of heire males of those Fitz-Paynes, it came to the Poynings, Barons likewise in those daies, and at length by a daughter and heire of Poynings in the raigne of Henry the Sixth, Barons Po nings. these Barons titles, Fitz-Payne, Brient, and Poinings were conjoyned in the Percies Earles of Northumberland: Howbeit within our fathers remembrance through the favour of King Henry the Eighth, the title of Baron Poi∣nings, reflourished in Sir Thomas Poinings, sonne of Sir Edward Poinings a martiall man and fruitfull father of much base brood; but with him it soone vanished away, as bastardly slips seldome take deepe root. From hence Stoure passeth on by Brienston, that is, Brients towne, where the Ro∣gerses dwell, Blandford an ancient family of Knights degree, to Market Blandford, which since in our time it chanced to be burnt downe, arose againe, built more elegantly, and is better peopled with Inhabitants. Then Stoure from thence, by Tarrent, where Richard Poer Bishop of Sarisbury founded a Cell, for Virgins Votaries, speedeth himselfe apace to that most ancient towne VINDOGLADIA, Vindogladi where Antoninus maketh mention. Which in the Saxons tongue is called , commonly Winburne, Winburn. and of the Monasterie, Wenburnminster: and from hence to Dorcester are counted sixteene miles just so many as the Emperour Antonine in his Itinerarie rec∣koneth betweene Vindogladia and Durnovaria. The name, as I conjecture, it taketh of the scituation, because it is seated betweene two rivers: for, so in the British tongue Windugledy soundeth as much as betweene two Swords: now that the Britaines, by a peculiar phrase of their owne, terme rivers, Swords, it appeareth by Aberdugledian, the British name of Milford Haven, which is as much to say, as the mouth of two ri∣vers, for that two rivers named with them Gledian, that is, Swords, runne into it. The latter name also of this town seemeth to be set from Rivers: For Winburn is compoun∣ded of Vin, Burne in the Saxon tongue what it signi∣fieth. a parcell of the old name, and the Saxon word Burne, which among them betokeneth a river: and by the addition thereof the Saxons were wont to name places standing upon rivers. The very town it selfe is seated upon the piece of an hill large in compasse, & replenished with Inhabitants, but few faire buildings. In the Saxons time right famous it was and much frequented for no other cause, I believe, but for that in those daies there remained divers tokens of the Romans majestie. In the yeare 713. Cuthburga sister to Ina King of the West-Saxons, Annales of the English-Saxons. when upon a loathing wearinesse of wedlocke she had sued out a Divorce from her owne husband King of Northumber∣land, built heere a Nunnerie: which yeilded unto the injurie of time, and fallen to decay, there arose in the very place thereof, a new Church with a faire Vault be∣neath under the quier, and an high spire besides the Toure-steeple. In which were pla∣ced Prebendaries in liew of those Nuns. Over whom, in our fathers daies Reginal Pole was Deane, who afterwards being Cardinal, and Archbishop of Canteburie, over and above the nobilitie of his house (for descended he was of the Royall bloud) became highly renowned for pietie, wisedome, and eloquence. King Etheldred a right good and vertuous Prince brother of Aelfred, slaine in the battell at Wittingham against the Danes, lieth enterred in this Church: upon whose Tombe, which not long since hath beene repaired, this new Inscription is to be read: IN HOC LOCO QVIESCIT CORPVS S. ETHELDREDI REGIS WEST SAXONVM MARTYRIS, QVI ANNO DO∣MINI DCCC LXXII.XXIII. APRILIS PER MANVS DANORVM PAGANORVM OCCVBVIT. That is, Heere lieth at rest the bodie of Etheldred King of the West-Saxons, Martyr, who died in the yeare of our Lord, 872. the 23. of April, by the hands of the Danes, Or Painims: Paganorum. Infidels. Neere unto whom lieth entombed Gertrude Blunt Marchionesse of Excester, daughter to William Lord Montjoy, and mother to Edward Courtney the last Earle of Devonshire of that house: and on the other side of the quier Iohn de Beaufort Duke of Somerset with his wife Margaret daughter and heire to Sir Iohn Beauchamp of Blet∣neshoe: whose daughter Margaret Countesse of Richmond, and mother of King Henry the Seventh, a most godly and vertuous Princesse, erected a Schoole heere for the trai∣ning up of youth. But now will I turne my pen from the Church to the Towne; when the Danes by their crafty devices went about to set the Englishmen together by the eares, and would have broken that league, and unitie which was betweene King Ed∣ward the Elder, and his cosen Aethelwald; Aethelwald then lusting after the Kingdome and wholly set against his liege Prince, fortified this towne as strongly as possibly he could: But so soone as Edward came towards him with his forces, and pitched his tents at , now called Badbury, he fled and conveied himselfe to his confe∣derates the Danes. Badbury. This Badbury is a little hill upon a faire doune, scarce two miles off, environed about with a triple trench, and rampier, and had by report in times past a Castle, which was the seate of the West-Saxon Kings: But now, if ever there were a∣ny such, it lieth so buried in the owne ruines, and rubbish, that I could see not so much as one token thereof. But, hard by, a sight I had of a village or mannour called King∣ston Lacy, Kingston Lacy. because together with Winburne it appurtained to the Lacies Earles of Lin∣colne: unto whom by covenant it came from the Earles of Leicester, by the meanes of Quincie Earle of Winchester. For King Henry the first had given it to Robert Earle of Mellent and of Leicester: and at the last, both places, from the Lacies fell unto the house of Lancaster, whose bountie, and liberalitie Winburne had good triall of. From this Winburne Stoure as it passeth, admitteth Alen a little brook, over which standeth S. Giles Winburne, the habitation of the worshipfull and ancient house of Astleys Knights, also Wickhampton, the inheritance sometime of the Barons de Mal∣travers: of whom the last, in the raigne of Edward the Third, left behind him two daughters onely, the one wedded unto Iohn de Arundell, grandfather to Iohn Earle of Arundell, who left unto his posteritie the title of Barons de Maltravers: the other, wife of Robert Le-Rous, and afterwards of Sir Iohn Keines, Knight. From hence the Stoure passeth on by Canford, Canford. Coperose or Vitriol. Alum. Tho. Walsing¦ham. 1317. under which not long ago, Iames Lord Mont∣joy, studious in Minerall matters began to make Calcanthum or Vitriol (we call it Co∣peras ) and to boile Alome: And out of which, in old time Iohn Earle of Warren, to the great disteining of his owne good name, and the damage of England, tooke, as it were, by strong hand and carried away, as it is to be seene in our Chronicles, Dame Alice Lacey, the wife of Thomas Earle of Lancaster. And now by this time Stoure leaveth Dorsetshire behind him, and after hee hath travelled through some part of Hantshire, at length taketh up his lodging in the Ocean: and yet not before hee hath entertained a pretty river that runneth to Cranburne, Cranburne. a place well watered. Where in the yeare of Salvation 930. Aelward a noble Gentleman, surnamed for his whitenesse Meaw, founded a little monasterie: which, Robert Fitz-Haimon a Norman, unto whom fell the possessions of the said Aelward, leaving heere one or two Monkes in a cell, translated to Theoksbury: From whom in order of succession, by the Clares Earles of Glocester, and Burghs Earles of Ulster, it came to Lionell Duke of Clarence, and by him to the Crowne. But now Cranborne hath his Uicount, now Earle of Salisburie whom King Iames for his approved wisedome and worth, honored first with the title of Baron or Lord Cecil of Essendon, Vicount Cranborne. 1604. Filioll. and the next yeare after, of Vicount Cranborne. South from hence lieth Woodland emparked, sometime the seat of the worshipfull family of Filioll, the heires whereof were married to Edward Seimor after Duke of Somerset, and Willoughby of Wallaton. As touching the Earles and Marquesses of this shire, Earles and Marquesses of Dorset. The life of Osmund, ma∣nuscript. King William the Conqueror, having now by conquest attained to the Kingdome of England, made Osmund that was Earle of Seez in Normandie, both Bishop of Sarisbury, and afterward also the first Earle of Dorset, and his Chancellor; highly admiring the godly wisedome of the man, and his notable good parts. Long after that, King Richard the Second in the one and twentieth yeare of his raigne, advanced Iohn de Beaufort, Iohn of Gaunt his sonne and Earle of Sommerset, to be Marquesse Dorset, of which dignitie King Henry the Fourth in hatred of Richard the Second deprived him. See the Duk of Somerset. And when as in the high Court of Parliament, the Commons of England there assembled, who loved him very dearely, made earnest intercession that the said dignitie of Marquesse might bee restored unto him, hee himselfe distasting this new title, and never heard of before those daies, utterly refused it. And then his younger brother named Thomas Beau∣fort was created Earle of Dorset: who afterward for his warlike prowesse and valour was by King Henrie the Fifth adorned with the title of Duke of Excester, and with the Earledome of In Nor∣mandie. Harcourt. For, he valiantly defended Harflew in Normandie against the Frenchmen, and in a pitched field encountring the Earle of Armignac put him to flight. After he was dead without issue, King Henry the Sixth nominated out of the same house of Lancaster, Edmund, first Earle, afterwards Marquesse Dorset, and lastly Duke of Somerset: whose sonnes being slaine in the civill wars, Edward the Fourth, when as now the family of Lancaster lay as it were, over troden in the dust, created Thomas Grey out of the house of Ruthin, who was his sonne in law (for the King had espoused the mother of the said Grey ) Marquesse Dorset: when in right of his wife he had entred upon a great state, and inheritance of the Bonvilles in this coun∣try, and the territories adjoyning. After him, succeeded in the same honour Thomas his sonne, and Henrie his nephew, by the said Thomas, who also was created by King Edward the Sixth Duke of Suffolk, having wedded Lady Frances daughter of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, 1553. and Neece unto King Henry the Eighth by his sister. This Duke in Queene Maries daies being put to death for high treason, lear∣ned too late, how dangerous a thing it is to marrie into the bloud royall; and to feed ambitious hopes, both in himselfe and in others. From that time the title of Dorset was bestowed upon none, untill King Iames at his first entrance into this Kingdome, exalted Thomas Sackvill ; Baron of Buckhurst, and Lord high Treasurer of England; a man of rare wisedome, and most carefull providence, to the honour of Earle of Dorset, who ended his life with suddaine death 1608. and left Robert his sonne his successor who deceasing within the yeare, left the said honour againe to Richard his hopefull sonne whom he begot of the Lady Margaret Howard Daughter to the late Duke of Norfolk. In this Countie are numbred Parishes 248. BELGAE. V Pon the North and East side of the Durotriges, borde∣red in times past the Belgae, who as it is by the name pro∣bable, and by authority of writers very likely, passed over from the Belgae, a people in Gaule, into Britaine. For, those Belgae having their beginning (as Caesar accor∣ding to the information he had from the men of Rhemes) of the Germans, and in old time being brought over the Rhene, finding the sweetnesse and fertility of the place, expelled the Gaules and planted them∣selves there: From whence, as the same Caesar saith, they gat them over in∣to Britaine for to spoile, and in warlicke manner to invade the country: and were all of them called after the name of those countryes from whence they came: Belgae, from the Belgae in Gaule. Low-coun∣tries. The Nethe Lands. where, after they had made warre they remained and began to till the grounds. But at what time they came hither to dwell, it is not certainly knowen, unlesse Divitiacus King of the Suessones, who flourished before Caesars time, brought over the Belgae hither: For, a great part as well of Gaule as of Britaine he had under him. Whence also they were named Bel∣gae, it is not sufficiently shewed. Belgae, whenc they were named. Hubert Thomas of Liege, a great learned man, supposed Belgae to be a German word, for that the Germans use to call the French and the Italians Wallen, as strangers, yea and some of them Welgen. Iohn Goropius, himself a Belgian, maintaineth it to be derived of the word Belke, which in the Belgicke tongue signifieth wrath or anger, as if they would be sooner incensed with choler than others. But seeing that the name of the Belgae, seemeth not to be sought for out of that tongue which the Germans of the Low-countries use at this day and is almost the same that our English-Saxon language (for from the Saxons it came, whom Charles the Great brought over into Brabant and Flanders) for my part I will in no wise diminish their credit, who fetch it forth of the ancient Gaules tongue, which remayneth in manner uncorrupt among our Welch-Britans, and will have them called Belgae of Pell, which in that tongue betokeneth Remote or far off. For, of all Gaule they were the furthest, and as they were furthest from the civill behaviour and humanity of the Roman Province, so they were also in situation and seat: and the Poet hath shewed that the Morini were the people of all Belgica most remote, when he wrote thus: Ex∣tremi{que} hominum Morini, that is, The morini of all men furthest. But come we now to our Belgae, who inhabited far and wide in Somerset∣shire, Wiltshire, and the inner parts of Hantshire. SOMERSETSHIRE. T He Countie of Somerset, commonly called, Somersetshire, is a verie large and wealthy Region: the North side whereof the Severne Sea beateth upon: the West part confineth with Den∣shire: in the South it bordereth first upon Devonshire, and then upon Dorsetshire: Eastward, upon Wiltshire: and North-east upon part of Glocestershire. The Soile verie rich, yeelding for the most part thereof passing great plentie, both of pasture and corne, and yet not without stonie hilles: Exceeding populous, and full of Inhabitants: furnished also with commodious havens, and ports sufficiently. Some thinke it was so called, for that the Or, weather. aire there, is so mild and summer-like: and in that sence the Welch Britans at this day terme it Gladerhaf, borrowing that name out of our English tongue. And verily, howsoever in summer time it is a right summer-like Country, yet surely, in winter it may worthily be called, a winterish Region, so wet, and weely, so miry and moorish it is, to the exceeding great trouble and encombrance of those that travell in it. But I will beleeve, that this name without all question grew from Somer∣ton, a famous Towne in ancient time, and of all others in the shire most frequented, considering that Asserius a writer of great antiquitie, calleth this Countie in every place, Somertunensis, that is Somertunshire. In the very first limit of the shire West∣ward, where Ex riseth in a solitarie and hilly moore, first appeareth Dulverton, a sil∣ly market, according to the soile, and neere unto it was a small religious house of Black-chanons at Barelinch, who in latter times acknowledged the Fetyplaces their founders. Higher upward on the Severne side, where this shire confineth upon Devonshire, first we meet with Porlock, Denshire. (in the English-Saxon tongue , and Watchet ) in times past Wecedpoort, roades both, and harbours for ships, the which in the yeere 886. were most grievously afflicted by the Danish cruell piracies. Betwixt them stan∣deth Dunster Castle upon a flat and low ground, Dunster Castle. enclosed round about with hilles, sa∣ving to the Sea-ward; built by the Moions, or Mohuns. From whose heires by agree∣ments and compositions it came in the end to the Lutterels. The Familie of the Mo∣huns, or Moi∣ons. A right noble and migh∣tie house this of the Mohuns was for a long time, and flourished from the verie Con∣querours daies, (under whose raigne that Castle was built,) unto the time of King Richard the Second. Two Earles there were of this Countie out of that familie, as I shall shew hereafter, William and Reginald, who in the Barons warre lost that honor. The Posteritie afterwards were reputed Barons: of whom the last named Iohn, left three daughters, Philip wife to Edward Duke of Yorke; Elizabeth, wedded to Wil∣liam Montacute, Earle of Sarisburie, the second of that name; and Maud, Joyned in marriage to the Lord Strange of Knokin: The Mother of which three Ladies, as the report goes, Commons. obtained of her husband so much pasture-ground in Common by the Towne side for the benefit of the Inhabitants, as she could goe about in one day bare∣foot. Neere to this Castle, there lie two little Villages consecrate unto two peculiar Saints of those places: the one of them is named Caranton, of Carantoc the Britan: the other, Saint Decu∣manus. Saint Decombs of Decuman ; who putting to sea out of South-wales arri∣ved here, in a waste and Desert Wildernesse, as we read, in an old Or, Marty∣rologe, that is, a legend of Martyrs. Agonel, overgrowen with shrubs, bushes, and briers, among woods of great thicknesse, reaching out farre in length and breadth, lying out with high and steepe hilles one way, and wonderfully un∣even with as deepe and hollow vallyes another way, where he bidding worldly vanity fare∣well, was by a murderer stabbed to death, and of the people honoured as a Saint. And betweene these Clives, was an old Abbey of white Monkes, founded by William de Romara, Cosen to the Earle of Lincolne. Somewhat farther from the SOMERSETTENSIS Comitatus. Vulgo Somersett Shyre Qui lim pars. fuit. BELGARVM sea is seated Stoke-Curcy, a Barony so named of the Lords thereof, the dwelling place of William De Curcy, The Familie of the Cur∣cies. Iohn de Curcie. Sewer to King Henrie the First. Out of which Familie, Iohn Curcy (as some write) issued, that conquered Vlster in Ireland, whom nature framed for magnanimitie, gravitie, and all other vertues, a great person and a noble: the record and testimonie of whose approoved valour, is to bee fetched out of the an∣tient Annals of Ireland. From thence the shore by little and little beareth out to Stertpoint, where the two greatest Rivers of all this Shire, meeting in confluence to∣gether, at one mouth runne forth into the Severne sea. Ptolomee calleth this conflu∣ence UZELLA Aestuarium, Vzella. of the river Ivel, which now hath lost his name alreadie before he came hither. It springeth in Dorsetshire, and no sooner entreth into So∣mersetshire, but he giveth name to Evel a great market towne, Evell. which rose by the decay of Ilchester, and taketh into him a rill, neere which is Camalet a steepe hill, and hard to get up: Camale . on the top whereof are to bee seene expresse tokens of a decayed Ca∣stle, with tripl rampires of earth cast up, enclosing within it many acres of ground; and there appeare about the hill five or six ditches, so steepe, that a man shall soo∣ner slide downe, than goe downe. The Inhabitants name it, King Arthurs Palace: That it was the Romans worke, appeareth by peeces of money of their coine daily digged out there. But what name it had among them, I know not, unlesse it be the same which in Ninnius his Catalogue of ancient Cities, is called Caer Calemion, in stead of Camelion, by transposition of the letters. Hereby are two townes, West Ca∣malet, and East Camalet, or Queens Camalet, happily for that it hath been in dowrie to some Queene. Cadburie. As for Cadburie a little towne next unto it, we may guesse verie pro∣bably to have been that Cathbregion, where K. Arthur, (as Ninnius writeth) defeated the English-Saxons in a memorable battell. The other of that name, called, North, Cadbury, K. Henry the Third, gave unto Nicolas de Moeles, who had married Avi . De novo Mer∣catu. Hawi∣sia, one of the heires of Iames of Newmarket, Moeles. whose posteritie continued a long time in great fame and honour, untill that Iohn dying in the time of Edward the Third, left two daughters, Muriel and Isabel; the one wife to William Botereaux, and the former to Thomas Courtney. Here to digresse aside from the River Ivel, Winecaun∣ton, no meane market, * is neighbour to this North Cadbury, and neere thereunto is Pen, 1756. Vinecaunton Pen. an obscure village now, but antiently famous, being ordained by destinie as it may seeme to the overthrow both of Britans and Danes. For at this verie place Ke∣niwalch a West Saxon, had such a day of the Britans, that they would scarcely ever after abide to come into the field against the English-Saxons. And many a yeere after that, King Edmund surnamed Iron-side, gave there a notable foile to the Danes, as he pursued Canutus their King, then usurping the Crowne of England from place to place. The house of Lorty, called in Latine Records, de Vrtiaco, was great here∣about, possessing Stoke Triske, Lorty, Baron de Vrtiaco. Cocklington, and other Mannours, and Henrie Lorty of this house, was summoned a Baron to the Parliament, in the time of King Edward the First. Now to returne: the river Ivel from hence runneth to ISCHALIS, mentioned by Ptolomee, Ischalis. Ivelcester, commonly, Ilchester. now Ivelcester: named in the Catalogue of Ninnius (if I be not deceived) Pontavel Coit, for Pont-Ivel Coit, that is, Ivel bridge in the wood: by Florentius of Worcester, Givelcester: at this day of small account, but onely for the antiquitie, and the market there kept: for, peeces of the Roman Caesars, or Emperours money, of gold, Or, Copper. brasse, and silver, are other whiles here digged up. That in old time it had been a great towne, and on some sides strengthned with a double wall, the ruines declare, and two towers upon the Bridge. About the time of the Normans comming in, well peopled it was, and much frequented: For, reckoned there were in it one hundred and seven Burgesses. A sure place also in those daies, and well fortified: for in the yeere of Grace 1088, when the Nobles of England had conspired, & plotted against King William Rufus, to put him downe, and set up his brother Robert Duke of Nor∣mandie in his Roiall throne, Robert Mowbray a warlike man, having burnt Bathe, forcibly assaulted this towne, but with lost labour; yet, what hee could not doe then, long processe of time hath now partly effected, and in some sort over-mastred it. A little beneath, by Langport a proper market town, the Rivers Ivel and Pedred run∣ning together, Mechelney. The River make betweene them an Iland, called Muchelney, that is to say, The great Iland, wherein are to bee seene the defaced walles and ruines of an old Abbey, built by King Athelstane, Pedred. as writers reporr. This Pedred, commonly named Parret, hath his beginning in the verie edge or skirt of the shire southward, and holding on a crooked and winding course thorow Crockhorne, in the Saxon tongue, , and Pedderton, Pedderton. to whom it gave the name, sometime Pedridan, the Roiall seat of King Ina, which towne now adayes is of none account, unlesse it be for the mar∣ket, and Faire there held, which Henrie Daubeney obtained of King Henrie the Sixth) at this place runneth into Ivel, and robbeth him of his name, when hee is come downe three miles Eastward, Montacute in Domesday booke, Mon∣tagu . and hath bidden farewell to Montacute, so ter∣med by the Earle of Moriton, brother by the Mothers side to King William the Conquerour, (who built a Castle upon the verie hill top, and at the foot thereof a Priorie) because the said hill riseth up by little and little to a sharpe p int: for, be∣fore time it was called Logoresburgh, Annales of Glaston. and Biscopeston. As for the Castle, it came to nothing many yeeres since: the stones thereof being had away to the repairing of the Monasterie and other houses. Upon the pitch of the said hill, there was a Cha∣pell afterwards set, and dedicated unto Saint Michael, built with arch-worke, and an embowed roofe overhead all of stone, right artificially: to which for halfe a mile wel nere, men ascended upon stone-staires, which in their ascent fetched a com∣passe round about the hil. But now that the Priorie and chapell both be pulled down, the faire and goodly house, which Sir Edward Philips Knight, and the Kings Sargeant at Law built lately at the hill foote, maketh a very beautifull shew. This high place Mont-acute hath given surname to that right honourable family of Montacute, Drogo Iuve∣nis. Lords Mon∣tacute. which had their beginning of Dru the younger. Out of which there were foure Earles of Sarisburie: the last of them left one daughter onely, Alice, who by Richard Nevil, pare Richard that renowned Earle of Warwick, who kept such stirres, and made all England to shake, also Iohn Nevil Marquesse Montacute, who were both slaine at Barnet field, in the yeere 1472. Afterward King Henrie the Eighth conferred the title of Lord Montacute, upon Henrie Poole, sonne of Margaret, daughter to George Duke of Clarence, that came of the daughter of that Richard Nevill aforesaid, Earle of Warwicke: and when hee had so done, straightwaies made him shorter by the head: afterwards Queene Marie advanced Anthonie Browne, whose Grandmother was a daughter of Iohn Nevill Marquesse Montacute, to the title and honour of Vi∣count Montacute, which his Grandchild Anthonie who succeeded him now honoura∣bly enjoyeth. And here I must not forget neither, Preston, sometime the seat of Iohn Sturton younger sonne to the first Lord Sturton, one of whose heires was married to Siden∣ham of Brimton thereby; neither Odcombe adjoyning thereto, as small a towne as it is, Odcombe. seeing it had a Baron of the owne, William de Briewer (for so was his father na∣med, in the Norman-French, because he was borne in an riceto. Briewers Ba∣rons. heath) who being taken up in the new Forrest, by King Henrie the Second in a hunting journey, prooved a great man, and gratious in the Court (as whom King Richard the First highly favo∣red as his minion, and all the world embraced and loved) grew unto a verie wealthy estate, married Beatrix of Vannes, widow to Reginald Earle of Cornwall, and his daughters, Register of Dunkeswell. for that his sonne died without issue, by their marriages brought great possessions to their husbands Breos, Wake, La-fert, and Piercy. Under this towne hard by, lieth Stoke under Hamden, where the Gornaies had their Castle, and built a Col∣ledge. This familie de Gornaico, Gornays. commonly named Gornay, was verie ancient, and of good account, descended from the same stocke, out of which the Warrens Earles of Surrie, and the Mortimers are sprung: but in the fore-going age it failed, and some of their lands descended by the Hamptons, to the house of the Newtons Knights, Newtons. who willignly acknowledge themselves to bee come out of Wales; and not long since to have beene named Caradocks. Neither must I passe over in silence, how Matthew Gournay, a most famous warriour in the raigne of Edward the Third, was buried heere; who in the fourescore and sixteenth yeere of his age, ended this life when (as appeareth by his Epitaph) he had fought at the siege of Algizer, against the Saracens, in the battels of Benamazin, Scluse, Cressie, Ingenos, Poictiers, and Nazars in Spaine. Then Parret. Pedred watereth Martocke, a litle market Towne, which in times past William of Boloigne King Stephens sonne gave unto Faramuse of Boloigne, whose sole heire Sibyll, was wedded to Ingelraine Fienes, from whom descended the Fienes, Ba∣rons of Dacre, and Lords Say and Sele. Parret from hence thorow the mire and moorish plaine countrey, Faramuse of Bolen. Fienes. holding his course Northward, passed by Langport a market Towne well frequented, and Aulre, a Village consisting of a few poore Cottages, which seemeth to have beene a Towne of good account: Aulre. for, when King Elfred had given the Danes such an overthrow in battell, and by strait siege compelled them to yeeld, so farre forth, that they tooke an oath immediatly to depart out of his dominions, and Godrus their King promised to become Christian, (as writeth Asserius) at this very place he with great pompe was Godfather to the said Godrus at the sacred Font. Beneath this place from the West, Parret receiveth into it the river Thone, which springing farre of in the West part of this Countrey, very neere unto Devon∣shire, runneth thorow most rich and pleasant fields, passing downe neere Wivelscomb, assigned anciently to the Bishops of Bathe, Wellington. and by Wellington, which in the time of King Edward the elder was a land of ix Hides. Lediard. Manentes, what time hee granted it toge∣ther with Lediard, that had twelve Manentes, Hides, unto the Bishop of Shirburne: Now, a prettie market Towne it is, and graced most by the habitation there of Sir Iohn Popham (For, vertuous men, and such as have so well deserved of their countrey, are not to bee passed in silence ) a man of an ancient worshipfull house, and withall a most upright Iusticer, Iohn Pop∣ham. and of singular industry, who being Lord chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench, administreth his office toward malefactours with such holesome and avail∣able severity, that England hath beene beholden unto him a long time for a great part of her private peace, and home-securitie. For thence with a soft streame, and gentle fall, Taunton. Thone runneth by Thonton, commonly Taunton, and giveth it his name. A very fine and proper Towne this is indeed, and most pleasantly seated: in a word, one of the eyes of this shire: where Ina King of the West Saxons, built a Castle, which Desburgia his wife raced, and laid even with the ground after shee had expelled from thence Eadbritch, King of the South-Saxons, who now had made himselfe Lord thereof, and used it as a bridle to keepe the countrey under, that he had subdued. When Edward the Confessour was King, it paid tribute (as wee find in the Kings Survey-Booke of England) after the rate of fiftie and foure Hides: and had in it threescore and three Burgers: The Bi∣shop of Winchester held it as Lord, and his courts or Pleas were kept heere thrice in the yeere. And these Customes appertaine to Taunton, Burgherists, Theeves, Penaltie fo peace-brea∣king, Pacis Infractio. Breach of peace, han∣nifare, pence of the Hundred, and pence of Saint Peter de Circieto, thrice in the yeere to hold the Bishops Pleas without warning, to goe forth to warfare with the Bishops men. The Countrey heere, most delectable on every side with greene medowes; flourishing with pleasant Gardens and Orchards, and replenished with faire Mannour houses; wonderfully contenteth the eyes of the beholders. And among these houses; those of greatest note are these: Orchard, which had in times past Lords of that name, from whom in right of Inheritance it descended unto the Portmans, men of Knights degree: Mallet. Hach Beauchamp, and Cory Mallet, bearing those additions of their Lords, For, this was the seat of the Mallets, that came of the Norman race, and from them in short time, Pointzes. it fell by the female heire to the Pointzes. From among whom in the raigne of Edward the First, Hugh was ranged in the rank of Parliament Barons, and out of that familie some remaine at this day of great reputation, and Knights in their Countrey. As for those Beauchamps, or de Bello Campo, they flou∣rished in high places of honour, Beauchamps Barons. from the time of King Henrie the Second: but es∣pecially since, that Cecilie Forts. de Fortibus, which derived her pedigree from the Earles de Ferrarijs, and that great Marshall of England William Earle of Pembroke, match∣ed in marriage with this familie. But in the raigne of Edward the Third, the whole in∣heritance, was by the sisters divided betweene Roger de S. Mauro, or Seimore, I. Meries, men of ancient descent, and great alliance. And hereupon it was, that King Henrie the Eight, when he had wedded Iane Seimor, mother to King Edward the Sixth, be∣stowed upon Edward Seimor her brother, the titles of Vicount Beauchamp, and Earle of Hertfort, whom King Edward the Sixth afterwards honoured, first wi h the name of Lord and Baron Seimor to bee annexed to his other titles, Vicount Beauchamp. lest (as the King saith in the Patent) the name of his mothers familie should bee overshadowed with any o∣ther stile, and yet afterward created him Duke of Sommerset. As you goe from thence, where Thone windeth himselfe into Parret, it maketh a pretty Iland betweene two rivers called in times past Aethelingey, that is, The Isle of Nobles, now commonly knowen by the name of Athelney: a place no lesse famous among us for King Alfreds shrowding himselfe therein, what time as the Danes now had brought all into broile, then those Marishes of Minturny among the Italians, wherein Marius lurked, and lay hidden. For, touching that King an ancient Poet, wrote thus: —Mixta dolori Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori. Si modó victor erat, ad crastiná bella pavebat, Si modó victus erat, ad crastina bella parabat. Cui vestes sudore jugi, cui sica cruore Tincta jugi, quantum sit onus regnare probarunt. With dolour great his joyes were mixt, his hope was joyn'd with dread, If now he victour were, next day of warres he stood affraid: If vanquisht now, the morrow next forthwith hee thought it good For to prepare for warre: his sword was aye begoard in blood. His garments eke with painfull sweat, were evermore bestain'd. Which well did shew what burden great he bare while that he raign'd. And in truth, this Isle afforded him a very fit shrowding corner: for that by reason of waters partly standing there in plashes, and partly resorting reflowing thither, which Asserius termed Gronnas, Latinizing a Saxon word) there is in manner no ac∣cesse into it. It had sometime a bridge betweene two castles, built by Aelfred, and a very large grove of Alders, full of goates and wild beasts: but of firme ground scarce two acres in breadth: on which, as saith William of Malmesbury (whose words these are and not mine) hee founded a little Monasterie: the whole frame whereof, hanged upon foure maine posts pit∣ched fast in the ground, with foure round isles of Sphaerick work contrived and brought round about the same. Not far from this Isle Parret having received the said river runneth a∣lone swelling with certaine sandy shelfes sometime in his channell, by the Hundred of N. Pederton anciently acknowledging the Bluets to have beene Lords thereof, who are thought to have brought that name from Bluet in litle Britaine: Heere it taketh into him an other river from East to beare him company which openeth it self neere Castle Cary which William Lovell Lord thereof held against K. Stephen in the behalfe of Mawd the Empresse right inheritrix of the Crown of England; Lovell. Lupellus in Latin. Castle Cary. whose issue male failing in the time of King Edward the Third, by heire female it came to Ni∣colas de S. Maure a Baron (of a distinct familie from that which was a few lines be∣fore mentioned) and shortly after about the time of Henrie the Fift by an heire fe∣male againe to the Lord Zouches of Harringworth: as a moitie of the lands of Lord Zouch of Ashby de la Zouch came before by coheires to the house of this S. Maures. Lord Saint Maure. But when the Lord Zouch was attainted by K. Henrie the Seventh for assisting King Richard the Third, this Castle was given by the K. to Robert Willoughby Lord Brooke as his lands at Bridge-water to the Lord Daubency and then hee was restored in bloud. From Castle Cary this water passeth by Lites-Cary to bee remembred in respect of the late owner Thomas Lyte a gentleman studious of all good knowledge, and so to Somer∣ton, the Shire towne in times past, as which gave the name thereto. A Castle it had of the West Saxon Kings, which Ethelbald King of Mercia forcing a breach through the wals sieged and kept: But now time hath gotten the mastry of it so, as that there is no apparance at all thereof: and the very Towne it selfe would have much a doe to keepe that name, were it not for a Faire of oxen and other beasts which is kept, there from Palme-Sunday untill the midst of Iune, with much resort of people; for that the countrimen all there about are very great Grasiers, breeders, and feeders of cattell. No sooner hath Parret entertained this river, but he speeds him apace toward, a great and populous towne, commonly called Bridg-water: and is thought to have taken that name of the Bridge and water there: but the old records and evidences gaine say this opinion: wherein it is alwayes called in plaine words Burg-water, that is, Walters burgh or Burgh-walter: and (as we may very probably conjecture) of that Walter de Duaco, or Doway who served under William Conqueror in his wars, and received at his hands many faire mannors in this shire. Neither carrieth it any other name in that grant or donation, whereby Fulke Paynes Lord of Bampton passed the possession of the place over unto William Briwer, to curry favour with him, being so great a man and so gracious a favourite with King Richard the First: This Williams sonne and bearing his name, bettered this haven, having obtained licence of King Iohn to fortifie a Castle, built heere a Fortresse: which now time hath wrought her will of: and began a bridg which one Strivet a gentleman of Cornwall with infinite cost finished: founded also the Hospitall of S. Iohn heere, and Dunkeswell Abbay. But when this William Briwer the younger left this life without issue, in the partition of his heritage it fell to Margaret his sister, in right of whose daughter that she had by William De la fort, it came to the house of Cadurci or Chaworths, and from it heredi∣tarily to the Dukes of Lancaster; as some lands heereabout by an other sister came to Breos, Earles of Bridge-water and so by Cantalupe to Lord Zauch. But the greatest honor that this place had, was by the title of an Earldome, that King Henrie the Eight adorned it withall, what time as he created Henrie Doubeney, Earle of Bridge-water, whose sister Cecilie, was married unto Iohn Bourchier the first Earle of Bath out of that house. Beneath this, Vzella. some few miles off, Parret voideth it selfe into the Severne sea at a wide mouth, which, as we said, Ptolomee called Vzella aestuarium: and some even at this day, Evelmouth: but the old English-Saxons , at which place, as Marianus mine author writeth, Ealstan Bishop of Shirburne about the yeere of Salva∣tion 845. discomfited the Danish forces as they were stragling abroad. At the same mouth where we saw Honispell an ancient Mannour of the Coganes, men of great fame in the conquest of Ireland, Selwood. there meeteth it another river called of some Brius which ariseth out of that great and wide wood in the East-side of this shire, which the Britans named Cort Maur, Bruiton. the Saxons Selwood, that is, (by Asserius interpretation) The great wood, but now not so great. This river first visiteth Bruiton, to which he leaveth his name: (a place memorable, for that the Mohuns there entombed, who built a re∣ligious house of the Fitz-Iames, runneth a long way by small villages and encreased with some other brooks, it watereth goodly grounds, untill it meete with softer soile then and there, it maketh certaine marshes and meres, and when the waters rise, envi∣roneth a large plot of ground, as an Isle, so called of old time in the British tongue, the Isle of Aualon, of Appulis: afterwards, named Inis Witrin, that is, The Glassy Isle, like as in the Saxon Idiome, the same sense , and in Latin Gloscania. Of which, a Poet of good antiquity writeth thus. Insula pomorum quae fortunata vocatur, Ex re nomen habet, quia per se singula profert. Non opus est illi s lcantibus arva colonis, Omnis abest cultus, nisi quem natura ministrat, Vltró foecundas segetes producit, & herbas, Nataque poma suis praetonso germine sylvis. The Apple-Isle and Fortunate, folke of the thing so call, For of it selfe it bringeth forth corne, Forage, fruit and all. There is no need of country clowns to plough and till the fields, Nor seene is any husbandry, but that which nature yeelds. Of the owne accord there commeth up, corne, grasse and herbs good store, Whole woods there be that apples beare, if they be prun'd before. In this Isle under a great hill rising in great height with a tower theron, which they call the Tor, William Mal∣mesbury, of Glastenburies antiquity. flourished the famous Abbay of Glastenbury, the beginning whereof is very ancient, setched even from that Ioseph of Arimathaea, who enterred the bodie of Iesus Christ, and whom Philip the Apostle of the Gaules sent into Britaine for to preach Christ. For, thus much both the most ancient records and monuments of this Monasterie testifie, and also Patrick the Irish Apostle (who lived there a Monke thir∣tie yeeres) in an Epistle of his hath left to memorie. Whereupon this place was by our Ancestors named, See Romans in Britanie. I confirm. Henric. 2. The first land of God, The first land of Saints in England, The beginning and fountaine of all religion in England, The tombe of Saints, The mother of Saints, The Church founded and built by the Lords Disciples. Neither is there any cause why we should much doubt thereof, sithence I have shewed before, that the beames of Christian religion in the very infancie of the primitive Church were spred and shi∣ned upon this Iland, yea and Freculphus Lexoviensis hath written, that the said Philip conducted barbarous nations, neere unto darknesse and bordering just upon the Oce∣an, to the light of knowledge and port of faith. But to our Monasterie, and that out of Malmesburie his booke touching this matter. When that old Cell or litle chappell which Ioseph had built by continuance of time was in the end decaied, Devi Bishop of Saint Davids erected a new one in the same place, which also in time falling to ruine, twelve men comming out of the North part of Britaine repaired it, and lastly King Ina (who founded a schoole in Rome for the training up and instruction of Eng∣lish youth, & to the maintenance thereof, as also for almes to be distributed at Rome, had laid an imposition of Peter-pence upon every house thorowout his realme) ha∣ving demolished it, built there a very faire and stately Church, to Christ, Peter, and Paul: and under the very highest coping thereof round about caused to bee written these verses: Syderei montes, speciosa cacumina Sion, A Libano geminae flore comante, cedri; Caelorum portae lati duo lumina mundi. Ore tonat Paulus, fulgurat arce Petrus: These verses with some little change are found in the fourth booke of Ve∣nantius Fortu∣natus his Po∣ems: in the praise partly of the Church in Paris and partly of Nants. Inter Apostolicas radianti luce coronas, Doctior hic monitis, celsior ille gradu, Corda per hunc hominum reserantur, & astra per illum: Quos docet iste stylo, suscipit ille polo. Pandit iter coeli hic dogmate, clavibus alter, Est via cui Paulus, janua fida Petrus. Hic Petra firma manens, ille Architectus habetur, Surgit in hijs templum quo placet ara Deo. Anglia plaude lubens, mittit tibi Roma salutem, Fulgor Apostolicus Glasconiam irradiat. A facie hostili duo propugnacula surgunt, Quod fidei turres urbs caput orbis habet. Haec pius egregio Rex Ina refertus amore, Dona suo populo non moritura dedit. Totus in affectu divae pietatis inhaereus, Ecclesiaeque juges amplificavit opes. Melchi-sedech noster meritó Rex, at{que} Sacerdos, Complevit verae religionis opus, Publica jura regens, & celsa palatia servans, Vnica Pontificum gloria, norma fuit. Hinc abiens, illinc meritorum fulget honore, Hic quoque gestorum lande perennis erit. Two mountaines high that reach the stars, two tops of Sion Faire, From Libanon two cedar trees their flouring heads doe beare. Two royall gates of highest heaven, two lights that men admire, Paul thundreth with his voice aloft, Peter he flasheth fire. Of all the Apostles crowned crew, whose raies right glittering bee, Paul for deepe learning doth excell, Peter for high degree. The one doth open the hearts of men, the other heaven doore, For Peter lets those into heaven, whom Paul had taught before. As one by meanes of doctrine shewes the way how heaven to win, By vertue so of th'others Keys, men quickly enter in. Paul is a plaine and ready way for men to heaven hie, And Peter is as sure a gate, for them to passe thereby. This is a rocke remaining firme: a Master builder hee: Twixt these a Church and altar both, to please God, built we see. Rejoice ô England willingly; For, Rome doth greet thee well, The glorious Apostles light in Glaston now doe dwell. Two bulwarks strong afront the Foe are rais'd; These towres of faith In that this Citie holds, the head even of the world it hath. These monuments King Ina gave of perfect meere good will Vnto his subjects; whose good deeds remaine and shall doe still. He with his whole affection in godlinesse did live, And holy Church to amplifie great riches also give. Well might he our Melchisedech, a Priest and King, be thought, For he the true religious worke to full perfection brought. The lawes in common weale he kept, and state in Court beside, The onely Prince that prelats grac'd, and them eke rectifide. And now departed hence to heaven, of right he there doth reigne, Yet shall the praise of his good deeds, with us for ay remaine. In this first age of the primitive Church, very holy men and the Irish especially ap∣plied the service of God in this place diligently, who were maintained with allowan∣ces from Kings, and instructed youth in religion and liberall sciences. These men em∣braced a solitarie life, that they might the more quietly studie the Scriptures, and by an austere kind of life exercise themselves to the bearing of the crosse. But at length, Dunstane a man of a subtile wit and well experienced, when he had once by an opi∣nion of his singular holinesse and learning wound himselfe into the inward acquain∣tance of Princes, in stead of these, brought in Monks of a later order, called Benedi∣ctines, and himselfe first of all others became the Abbat or ruler heere of a great co∣vent of them; who had formerly, and afterward gotten at the hands of good and godly Princes a royall revenue. And having reigned as it were in all affluence 600. yeres (for all their neighbours round about were at their beck) they were by K. Henry the Eighth dispossessed & thrust out of all, & this their Monastery, which was growne now to be a prety Citie, environed with a large wall a mile about; & replenished with stately buildings, was razed and made even with the ground: and now onely shew∣eth evidently by the ruines thereof, how great and how magnificent a thing it was. Now, I might be thought one of those that in this age have vanities in admirati∣on, if I should tell you of a Walnut tree in the holy Churchyard heere, that never did put forth leafe before S. Barnabees feast, and upon that very day was rank and full of leaves; but that is now gone, and a young tree in the place: as also of the Hawthorne in Wiral-park hard by, which upon Christmasday sprouteth forth as well as in May. And yet there bee very many of good credit, if we may beleeve men of their word, who avouch these things to be most true. But, before I returne from hence, I wil brief∣ly set downe unto you that, which Giraldus Cambrensis an eie-witnesse of the thing, hath more at large related touching Arthurs Sepulchre in the Churchyard there. When Henrie the Second King of England, Arthur, the warlike Wo ¦thy. tooke knowledge out of the Songs of British Bards, or Rhythmers, how Arthur that most noble Worthy of the Britans who by his Martial prowesse, had many a time daunted the fury of the English-Saxons, lay buried heere betweene two Pyramides, or sharpe-headed pillars, hee caused the bodie to be searched for: and scarcely had they digged seven foot deepe into the earth, but they lighted upon a Tomb or Grave-stone, on the upper face whereof was fastened a broad Crosse of lead grosly wrought: which being taken forth shewed an inscription of letters: and under the said stone almost nine foot deeper, was found a Sepulchre of oake made hollow, wherin the bones of that famous Arthur were bestowed, which In∣scription or Epitaph, as it was sometime exemplified, and drawn out of the first Copie in the Abbey of Glascon, I thought good for the antiquitie of the characters here to put downe. The letters being made after a barbarous maner, & resembling the Gothish Character, bewray plainely the barbarisme of that age, when ignorance (as it were) by fatall destinie bare such sway, that there was none to be found, by whose writings the renowne of Arthur might bee blazed, and commended to posteritie. A matter and argument doubtlesse, meet to have beene handled by the skill and eloquence of some right learned man, who in celebrating the praises of so great a prince, might have wonne due commendation also for his owne wit. For, the most valiant Champian of the British Empire, seemeth even in this behalfe onely, most unfortunate, that hee never met with such a trumpetter, as might worthily have sounded out the praise of his valour. But behold the said Crosse and Epitaph therein. Neither will it be impertinent, if I annex hereunto what our Countrey man, Io∣seph, [a Monke] of Excester, no vulgar and triviall Poet, versified, sometime of Ar∣thur in his Poeme Antiocheis, wherein he described the warres of the Christians for recoverie of the Holy Land, and was there present with King Richard the First, spea∣king of Britaine. Hinc celebri fato foelici claruit ortu Flos Regum Arthurus, cujus cúm facta stupori, Non micuere minús, totus quód in aure voluptas, Et populo plaudente favus. Quemcun{que} priorum Inspice, Alexandrum Magnum. Pelaeum commendat fama tyrannum, Pagina Caesareos loquitur Romana triumphos, Alcidem domitis attollit gloria monstris. Sed nec pinetum coryli, nec sydera solem Aequant: Annales Latios, Graios{que} revolve, Prisca parem nescit, aequalem postera nullum Exhibitura dies. Reges supereminet omnes, Solus praeteritis melior, major{que} futuris. For famous death, and happie birth, hence flourish'd next in place, Arthur the flower of noble Kings: whose acts with lovely grace Accepted and admired were, in peoples mouth and eare, No lesse than if sweet hony they, or pleasant musicke were. See former Princes, and compare his worth even with them all: That King in Pella borne, whom we great Alexander call, The trumpe of fame doth sound aloft. The Roman Stories eke Much praise and honour both, of their Triumphant Caesars speake. And Hercules exalted is for taming Monsters fell: But Pine-trees, hazels low, (as Sunne the Starres) doe farre excell: Both Greeke and Latine Annals read: no former age his Peere, Nor future time his match can shew. For this is plaine and cleere, In goodnesse hee and greatnesse both, surmounts Kings all and some, Better alone, than all before, greater than those to come. And this worthy Knight, (that I may note so much also by the way out of Ninnius the Britan, if it be worth the noting) was called, Mab uter, that is, A terrible or dread∣full Sonne, because hee was from his childhood cruell; and Artur, which in the British tongue importeth as much as a horrible beare, or any yron mall, wherewith the Lions jawes are bruised and broken. Lo here also, if it please you, other monuments of this place, though they bee not of the greatest antiquitie, The Pyrami∣des of Gla∣stenburie. out of the foresaid William of Malmesburie. That (quoth he) which to all men is altogether unknowen, I would gladly relate, if I could picke out the truth: namely, what those sharp pillars or pyramides should meane which beeing set distant certaine feet from the old Church, stand in the front, and border of the Churchyard. The highest of them, and that which is neerer to the Church, than the rest, hath five stories, and carrieth in height six and twentie foot: Which albeit for age it be ready to fall, yet hath it cer∣taine antiquities to be seene, that plainly may be read, although they cannot so easily bee un∣derstood. For in the uppermost storie, there is an Image in habit and attire of a Bishop: in the next under it, the statue of a King in his royall robes, and these Letters, HER. SEXI. and BLISVVER . In the third, these names likewise, and nothing else, WEM∣CHEST. BANTOMP. WINEVVEGNE. In the fourth HATE. WVLFREDE, &c. EANFLEDE. In the fifth, which is the lowest, a portaict, and this writing, LOGVVOR. WESLIELAS, &c. BREGDENE. SVVELVVES. HVVINGEN∣DES. BERNE. The other Pyramis is eighteene foot high, and hath foure floores or sto∣ries; in which you may read, HEDDE Episcopus. Bishop, &c. BREGORRED, &c. BEORVVALDE. What all this should signifie, I take not upon me rashly to define: but by conjecture I gather, that in some hollowed stones within, are contained the bones of those, whose names are read without. Surely LOGVVOR is affirmed for certaine, to be the same man, of whose name the place was sometime called LOOVVERESBEORGH, which now they call Mont-acute And BEORVVALDE semblably was Abbat next after HEMGISELVS, To reckon up here the Kings of the West-Saxons, that were buried in this place, would be but needlesse: Edgar the Peaceable. Howbeit, King Edgar the Peaceable, who alwaies tendred peace, in regard thereof, if there were nothing else, I cannot but remember, and put downe his Epitaph, not unbeseeming that age wherein he lived. Auctor opum, vindex scelerum, largitor honorum, Sceptriger Edgarus regna superna petit. Hic alter Salomón, legum pater, orbita pacis, Quód caruit bellis, claruit inde magis. Templa Deo, templis monachos, monachis dedit agros, Nequitiae lapsum, Iustitiae{que} locum. Novit enim regno verum perquirere falso, Immensum modico perpetuum{que} brevi. That well of wealth, and scourge of sinne, that honour-giver great, King Edgar hence is gone to hold in heaven his royall seat: This second Salomon that was, laws-father, Prince of peace, In that he wanted warres, the more his glorie had increase. Churches to God, to Churches Monkes, to Monks faire Lands he gave, Downe went in his daies wickednesse, and Iustice place might have: A pure crowne for a counterfeit he purchased once for all, An endlesse Kingdome for a short, a boundlesse for a small. Beneath Glascon three Rivers which there meete, doe make a meere, and issuing forth at one litle mouth, runne all in one channell West-ward, to Uzel∣la Frith, Godney Moore. first by Gedney or (as others will have it) Godney more, which (they say) signifieth, Gods Iland, and was granted to Ioseph of Arimathea: then, by Wead∣moore, a Mannour of King Aelfreds, which by his last Will and Testament, hee gave as a legacie to his sonne Edward, and so by that moory or fenny-country Crentmaesh, that runneth out verie farre, which the Monkes of Glastenburie interpreted to bee the Countrey of Fen Frogges, like as the litle Towne Brentknoll there, which signifieth, Frog-hill. Mendip-hils. From thence Eastward, Mendippe hils extend themselves in length and bredth; Leland calleth them Minerarios, that is, the Minerall hills ; and rightly (as I suppose) se∣ing they be in old writings named Muneduppe: for, rich they are in lead mines, and good to feed cattell. Among these hils there is a cave or denne farre within the ground: Ochy hole. wherein are to be seene certaine pits and rivelets, the place they call Ochie∣hole, whereof the Inhabitants feine no fewer tales, nor devise lesse dotages, than the Italians did of their Sibyls Cave in the mountaine Apenninus. The name (no doubt) grew of Ogo, a British word, that betokeneth, a Den: even of the like den, the Isle Euboea, Strabo. was by such another name sometime called Ocha. Not far hence, in the raigne of K. Henrie the Eighth, was turned up with the plough, a table of lead somewhat long, which lay long at Lambith in the Duke of Norfolkes house, erected sometime for a trophee in token of victorie, with this inscription: TI. CLAUDIUS CAESAR. AUG. P. M. TRIB. P. VIIII. IMP. XVI. DE BRITAN. This Tribuneship of Claudius here mentioned, fell out to be in the 802. yeere af∣ter the foundation of Rome, when Antistus and M. Suillius were Consuls, what time P. Ostorius Governour of Britaine as Vice-Pretour, was welcomed thither with ma∣ny troubles. Out of this time, give me leave, I pray you, to frame certain conjectures: That in this yeere Claudius erected two Trophees, or monuments of victorie over the Britans, his owne ancient coine sheweth as a most certaine witnesse, in the fore∣part whereof is this plaine Inscription, See before among the Coines. TI. CLAVD. CAESAR. AVG. P. M. TR. P. VIIII. IMP. XVI. P. P. and in the reverse thereof, DE BRITAN. and there is expressely stamped a triumphall Arch, with an Image of one gallopping on horsebacke, and with two triumphall pillars. What Britaines these were then van∣quished, Tacitus sheweth, testifying that this yeare Claudius by the conduct of Osto∣rius subdued two Nations of the Britans this yeare, Cangi, a peo∣ple of Bri∣taine. to wit, The ICENI, and the CAN∣GI. But forasmuch as the Iceni, lay (as it were) in another climate. What if I said, this Trophee was set up in token of victorie over the Cangi, a smaller nation among our Belga, and that those CANGI, were seated in these parts. For, not far from hence is the sea, that lieth toward Ireland, neere which he placeth the Cangi, of whose name there seemeth as yet in certaine places of this tract, some shadow to remaine, namely, in Cannington, & Cannings, pettie countries and Hundreds: as also in Wincaunton, which elsewhere is called Cangton. But of these matters let the reader be judge; my selfe (as I said) doth no more but conjecture, whiles I seeke to trace out these their footsteps, and hope to find them out some where-else. Among these hils standeth Chuton, which was the habitation, (if I take not my markes amisse) of William Bonvill, whom King Henrie the Sixth called by his writ of Summons to the Parliament, Bonvill. by the name William de Bonvill and Chuton, among other Barons of the Realme, made him Knight of the Garter, and richly matched his sonne in marriage with the sole daughter of Lord Harington. But when he (un∣thankefull man that he was) in the heate of civill warre, revolted, and tooke part with the house of Yorke, as if vengeance had pursued him hard at heeles, that onely sonne of his he saw taken from him by untimely death, and his nephew by the same sonne, Baron of Harington, slaine at the battell of Wakefield: and immediately after, (that his old age might want no kind of miserie) whiles he waited still, and long looked for better daies, was himselfe taken prisoner in the second battell of Saint Albans, and having now run through his full time by course of nature, lost his head, leaving be∣hind him for his heire, his Grand-childs daughter Cecilie, a Damsel of tender yeares, who afterwards with a great inheritance, 1. Edward. 4. was wedded to Thomas Greie, Marquesse Dorset. But his bloud after his death was by authoritie of Parliament restored. Under Mendip hills northward, there is a little village, called, Congersburie, so na∣med of one Congar, a man of singular holinesse. Capgrave hath written, that hee was the Emperours sonne of Constantinople who lived there an Eremite: Harpetre. also Harpe∣tre, a Castle by right of inheritance, fell to the Gornaies, and from them descended to the Ab-Adams, who as I have read, restored it to the Gornaies again. Southward, not farre from the foresaid hole, where Mendip slopeth downe with a stony descent, a lit∣tle citie with an Episcopall See, is scituate beneath at the hill foot, sometime called, (as saith Leland) but whence he had it, Welles. I wot not, Theodorodunum, now Welles, so named of the Springs, or Wels, which boile and walme up there: like as Susa in Persia, Croia in Dalmatia; and Pagase in Macedonia, were named of the like fountaines; in their countrey speech: Steph n urbi∣bus, and Bar∣letius. whereupon this also in Latin, is called, Fontanensis Ecclesia, as one would say, Fountain-Church. Fot multitude of Inhabitants, for faire and stately buildings, it may well and truely chalenge the preheminence of all this Province. A goodly Church it hath, and a Colledge, founded by King Ina, in honour of Saint Andrew, and soone after endowed by Princes, and great men with rich livings, and revenewes: among whom King Kinewolph by name, in the yeare of our Lord 766. granted unto it very many places lying thereabout. For, in a Charter of his wee reade thus, I Kinewolph, King of the West-Saxons, for the love of God, and (that which is not openly to be spoken) for some vexation of our enemies, those of the Cornish Nation, with the consent of my Bishops and Nobles, will most humbly give and consecrate some parcell of Land to Saint Andrew the Apostle, and servant of God, that is to say, as much as com∣meth to Manentium. XI. Eleven Hides, neere to the River called Welwe, for the augmentation of that Mo∣nasterie, which standeth neere the great fountaine that they call Wiclea. This Charter have I set downe, both for the antiquitie, and because some have supposed, that the place tooke name of this River; verily, neere the Church there is a Spring, called Saint Andrewes Well, the fairest, deepest, and most plentifull that I have seene, by and by making a swift Brooke. The Church it selfe all throughout is very beautifull, but the Frontispiece thereof, in the West end, is a most excellent and goodly piece of worke indeede, for it ariseth up still from the foot to the top all of imagerie, in curi∣ous and antike wise wrought of stone carved, and embowed right artificially, and the Cloisters adjoyning very faire and spacious. A gorgeous pallace of the Bishops, built in manner of a Castle, fortified with walles, and a moate standeth hard by, Southward; and on the other side faire houses of the Prebendaries. Combes. For, Seven and Twenty Prebends, with nineteene other petty Prebends, beside a Deane, a Chaunter, a Chancellour, and three Archdeacons belong to this Church. In the time of K. Edward the elder, a Bishops See was here placed. For, when the Pope had suspended him, because the Ecclesiasticall discipline and juris∣diction in these westerne parts of the Realme, began openly to decay, then he know∣ing himselfe to be a maintainer, and Nurse-father of the Church, ordained three new Bishopricks, to wit, of Kirton. Cridie, Cornwall, and this of Welles, where hee made Eadulph the first Bishop. 905. But many yeares after, when Giso sate Bishop there, Harold Earle of the West-Saxons, and of Kent (who gaped so greedily for the goods of the Church) so disquieted and vexed him, Historie of Bathe. that hee went within a little off quite aboli∣shing the dignitie thereof. But King William the Conquerour, after hee had over∣throwne Harold, stretched out his helping hand to the succour of banished Giso, and reliefe of his afflicted Church. At what time, (as witnesseth Doomesday booke ) the Bi∣shop held the whole towne in his owne hands, which paid tribute after the proportion of fiftie Hides. Afterwards in the raigne of Henry the First, Iohannes de Villula, of Tours in France, being now elected Bishop, translated his See to Bathe, since which time the two Sees growing into one, the Bishop beareth the title of both; so that hee is called, The Bishop of Bathe and Welles. Whereupon the Monkes of Bathe, and Ca∣nons of Welles, See in the Decretals. Ne sede vacante aliquid inno∣vetur. entred into a great quarrell, and skuffled, as it were, each with the other about the choosing of their Bishops: Meane while, Savanaricus Bishop of Bathe, being also Abbat of Glastenbury, translated the See of Glastenbury and was called Bishop thereof: but when hee died, this title died with him: and the Monkes and Canons aforesaid, 1193. were at length brought to accord, by that Robert, who divided the Patrimonie of Welles Church into Prebends, instituting a Deane, Sub-deane, &c. Joceline also, the Bishop about the same time, repaired the Church with new buildings, and within remembrance of our Grand-fathers, Raulph of Shrewsburie, (so some call him) built a very fine Colledge for the Vicars and singing-men, fast by the North side of the Church, and walled in the Bishops Palace. But this rich Church, was dispoiled of many faire possessions in the time of King Edward the Sixth, when England felt all miseries which happen under a Child-King. As ye goe from the Palace to the market-place of the towne, Thomas Beckington the Bishop built a most beautifull gate: who also adjoyned thereto passing faire houses all of uniforme height neere the Market-place; in the middest whereof is to be seene a Market-place, supported with seven Columnes or pillar without, arched over-head right daintily, which William Knight the Bishop, and Wolman the Deane founded for the use of people resorting thither to the Market. Thus much of the East-part of the towne: In the West-side thereof, I have seene the parish Church of Saint Cuthberts: next unto which standeth an Hospitall, founded by Nicolas Burwith Bishop for foure and twentie poore people. Out of those Mendip or Mine-hils, springeth the River Frome, which running East-ward, by Cole-pits, before it hath held on a long course that way, turneth North-ward, Fareley. Philips Nor∣ton. and serveth in stead of a bound confining this shire and Gloceste∣shire, and passeth hard under Farley, a Castle not long since of the Lord Hungerfords, scituate upon a Rocke, where Humfrey Bohun built sometime a Monkerie, not farre from Philips Norton, a greate Market-towne, which tooke the name of a Church, consecrate to Saint Philip. Lower than it, Selwood. Selwood, whereof I spake erewhile, spreadeth long and large: a wood standing well and thicke of trees, whereof the country round about adjoyning was named (as Ethelward mine Author writeth, Selwoodshire: and a towne steepely seated thereby is yet called Frome Selwood, which gaineth very much by the trade of cloathing: From which, Westward, not full two miles, there sheweth it selfe, a Castle (little though it be) yet fine and trim consisting of foure round Turrets, which being built by the Delamares, and named thereupon Monney de la Mare, from them came by way of inheritance to the Powlets. Monney de la Mare. And not farre from thence is Witham, where King Henry the Third erected a Nunnerie, which afterward was the first house, and as it were, mother to the Carthusians or Charter-house Monks in England, as Hinton not far off neere Farley Castle was the second. And now by this time, Frome grown bigger by some rivelets issuing out of this wood, joyneth with the noble river Avon: Bathe. Aqua So i . which holding on a crooked course, runneth anone to that ancient Citie which of the hote Bathes Ptolomee called , that is, Hote waters: An∣toninus, AQVAE SOLIS, that is, The waters of the Sunne: the Britaines Yr ennaint Twymin and Caer Badon, the Saxons , and of the concourse thither of diseased people Akmanchester, that is, The Citie of sickely folke: Stephanus nameth it Badiza, we at this day Bath, and the Latinists commonly, Bathonia. Sea∣ted it is low in a plaine, and the same not great; environed round about with hills al∣most all of one height, out of which certaine rilles of fresh river waters continually descend into the Citie, to the great commoditie of the Citizens. Within the Citie it selfe there bubble & boile up three springs of hote water, Hot Waters. of a blewish or sea-colour, sending up from them thin vapours, and a kind of a strong sent withall, by reason that the water is drilled, and strained through veines of Brimstone, and a clammy kind of earth called Bitumen. Which springs are very medicinable, and of great vertue to cure bodies over-charged, and benummed (as it were) with corrupt humours: For, by their heat they procure sweat, and subdue the rebellious stubbornnesse of the said hu∣mors. Yet are not they wholesome at all houres: For, from eight of the clocke in the forenoone unto three after noone, they are in manner skalding hote, and doe worke: and being thus troubled cast up from the bottome certaine filth: during which time they are shut: neither may any body goe into them, untill by their sluces they clense themselves, and rid away that filthinesse. Of these three, The Crosse Bath (so called of a crosse standing upright in old time in the midst of it) is of a very mild and temperate warmth: and hath twelve seates of stone about the brinke or bor∣der thereof, and is enclosed within a wall. The second, distant from this not fully 200. foot is much hotter: whereupon it is termed Hote Bathe: Adjoyning to these, is a Spittle or Lazar house, built by Reginald Bishop of Bath for the reliefe of poore dis∣eased persons. And those two are in the midst of a Street on the West-side of the Citie. The third, which is the greatest, and after a sort in the very bosome and heart of the Citie, is called the Kings Bath, neere unto the Cathedrall Church, walled also round about, and fitted with 32. seates of arched worke: wherein men and women may sit apart, who when they enter in put upon their bodies linnen garments, and have their guides. Where the said Cathedrall Church now standeth, there was in ancient time, The Temple of Minerva. as the report goeth, a Temple consecrated to Minerva. Certes, Solinus Polyhistor speaking (no doubt) of these hote Bathes saith thus, In Britaine, there are hot springs very daintily adorned and kept for mens use: the patronesse of which fountaines is the Goddesse Minerva: in whose Temple the perpetuall fire never turneth ashes, and dead coales, but when the fire beginneth to die, it turnes into round masses of stone. Howbeit Athenaeus writeth, that all hote Bathes which naturally breake out of the bowels of the earth are sacred to Hercules. And in very deede, there is to bee seene in the walles of this Citie an ancient Image (such as it is) of Hercules grasping in his hand a Snake, among other old monuments by the injurie of time now altogether defa∣ced: But that we may not contend about this matter, let us grant (if it be so thought good) that Bathes were consecrated to Hercules, and Minerva, joyntly. For the Greekes doe write that Pallas first ministred water unto Hercules for to bath him, af∣ter he had atchieved his labours. For my purpose it shall suffice, if I be able to prove by the authoritie of Solinus (who writeth that Pallas was the Patronesse of these Bathes) this Citie to be the same which the Britans in their tongue called Caer Pallad∣dur, Caer Palladur. that is, The Citie of Pallas-water, or Vrbs Palladiae Aquae, if a man turne it into Latine. For, the matter, the name, and signification doe most fitly agree. The finding out of these Bathes our Fables attribute to the King of Britans Bleyden Cloyth, Britans ad∣dicted to Magicke. that is, Bleyden the Magician ; but with what probabilitie, that I leave to others. Plinie indeed affirmeth, that the Britans in old time used the practice of magick with so great cere∣monies, that it seemed they taught it the Persians: yet dare I not ascribe these Bathes to any art magicall. Some of our writers, when their minds were busied in other matters, report Iulius Caesar to have beene the first finder of them: But my opinion is, that later it was ere the Romans had knowledge of them, seeing Solinus is the first that hath made mention of them. The English-Saxons about the 44. yeare after their comming into Britaine, when they had broken league and covenant, and kind∣led againe the coales of war which had already beene quenched, besieged this Citie: But when the warlike Arthur came upon them, they tooke the hill named Mons Bad nicus, where, when couragiously a long while they had fought it out to the ut∣termost, a great number of them were slaine. This hill seemeth to be the very same, which now is called Bannesdowne, over a little village neere this Citie, which they call Bathstone, on which there are bankes, and a rampier as yet to be seene. Yet some there be, I know, who seeke for this hill in Yorkshire: But Gildas may bring them backe againe to this place: For, in a manuscript Copie within Cambridge-Librarie, where he writeth of the victorie of Aurelius Ambrose, thus we read: Vntill that yeare wherein siege was laid to the hill of Badonicus, which is not farre from Severne mouth. But in case this may not perswade them, know they, that the vale which runneth here along the river Avon, is named in British Nant Badon, that is, The Vale of Badon: and where we should seeke for the hill Badonicus, but by the Vale Badonica, I cannot hi∣therto see. Neither durst the Saxons for a long time after, set upon this Citie, but left it for a great while to the Britans. Howbeit in the yeare of Christ 577. when Cowa∣lin King of the West-Saxons, had defeated the Britans at Deorbam, in Glocestershire, being both straightly besieged, and also assaulted, it yeilded at first: and within few yeares recovering some strength grew up to great dignity and therewith got a new name, Ackmancester, as I said: For, Osbrich in the yeare 676. founded a Nunnery there: and immediately after, when the Mercians had gotten it under them, King Offa built another Church, both which in the time of the Danish broiles were overthrowne. Out of the ruines of these two, arose afterwards the Church of S. Peter, in which Ead∣gar surnamed the Peace-maker, being crowned, and sacred King, bestowed upon the Citie very many Immunities, the memorie of which thing the Citizens yearely with Solemne plaies doe yet celebrate. In Edward the Confessors time, (as we read in Domes-booke of England ) it paied tribute according to 20. Hides, when as the Shire paid. There, the King had 64. Burgers, and 30. Burgers of others. But this prospe∣ritie of theirs endured not long: for, soone after the Normans comming in, Robert Mowbray Nephew to the Bishop of Constance, who had raised no small Sedition a∣gainst King William Rufus, sacked and burned it. Yet in short space it revived, and recovered it selfe, by meanes of Iohn de Villula of Tours in France, who being Bishop of Welles, for five hundred markes (as saith William of Malmesburie) purchased this Citie of King Henry the First, and translated his Episcopall chaire hither, retai∣ning also the title of Bishop of Welles, and for his owne See built a new Church: which being not long since ready to fal, Olivar Bishop of Bathe began to found another hard by that old (a curious and stately piece of worke, I assure you) and almost finished the same: Which if he had performed indeed, it would no doubt have surpassed the most Cathedrall Churches of England. But the untimely death of so magnificent a Bishop, the iniquitie and troubles of the time, and the suppression of religious houses ensuing, with the late avarice of some, who have craftily conveied the money col∣lected throughout England for that use, another way (if it be true that is reported) have envied it that glory. But neverthelesse this Citie hath flourished as well by clothing, as by reason of usuall concourse thither for health twice every yeare, yea and hath fortified it selfe with walles, wherein there are set certaine Antique Images and Roman Inscriptions for the proofe of their antiquitie, which now by age are so ea∣ten into, and worne, that they can hardly be read. And that nothing might be wanting to the state and dignitie of Bathe, some noble men it hath honoured with the title of Earle. For, we read, that Philibert of Chandew descended out of Bretaigne in France, was by King Henry the Seventh stiled with this honor. Afterwards, King Henrie the Eighth, Earles of Bathe. in the 28. yeare of his reigne created Iohn Bourcher Lord Fitzwarin, Earle of Bathe. Who died shortly after, leaving by his wife the sister of H. Daubeney Earle of Bridge-water, Inquisit. 31. Henrie 8. Iohn second Earle of this familie, who by the daughter of George Lord Roos had Iohn Lord Fitz-Warin, who deceased before his father, having by Fr. the daughter of S. Thomas Kitson of Hengrave William now third Earle of Bathe, who endeavoureth to beau∣tifie and adorne his nobilitie of birth, with commendable studies of good letters. The longi∣tude of this Citie is according to Geographers measure 20. degrees, and 16. minutes. But the Latitude 51. degrees, and 21. minutes. And now for a farwell, loe heere Nechams verses, such as they bee, of these hot waters at Bathe, who lived 400. yeares since. Bathoniae thermas vix praefero Virgilianas, Confecto prosunt balnea nostra seni. Prosunt attritis, collisis, invalidisque, Et quorum morbis frigida causa subest. Praevenit humanum stabilis natura laborem; Servit naturae legibus artis opus. Igne suo succensa quibus data balnea fervent, Aenea subter aquas vasa latere putant. Errorem figmenta solent inducere passim. Sed quid? sulphureum novimus esse locum. Our Bathes at Bath, with Virgils to compare, For their effects, I dare almost be bold: For feeble folke, and crasie good they are, For bruis'd, consum'd, far-spent, and very old: For those likewise, whose sicknesse comes of cold. Nature prevents the painfull skill of man; Arts worke againe, helps nature what it can. Men thinke these Baths of ours are made thus hot, By reason of some secret force of fire, Which under them as under brazen pot Makes more or lesse, as reason doth require, The waters boile, and walme to our desire: Such fancies vaine, use errors forth to bring, But what? we know from Brimstone veines they spring. Have heere also, if you list to read them, two ancient Inscriptions very lately dig∣ged up neere the Citie in Waldcot field, hard by the Kings high way side, which Robert Chambers, a studious lover of antiquities, hath translated into his garden: From whence I copied them out. G. MVRRIVS. C. F. ARNIEN SIS. FORO. IVLI. MODESTVS. MIL. LEG. II. Adjutric AD. Piae. P. Foelicis. F. IVLI. SECVND. AN. XXV. STIPEND. Hic situs H. S. E. DIS. MANIBVS. M. VALERIVS. M. POL. EATINVS. Cobortis E∣quitum. C. EQ. MILES. LEG. AVG. AN. XXX. STIPEND. X. H. S. E. I have seene these Antiquities also fastened in the walles on the in-side, betweene the North, and West gates; to wit, Hercules bearing his left hand aloft, with a club in his right hand. In the fragment of a stone in great and faire letters. Decurioni. DEC. COLONIAE Glevi, that is, Of Glocester. GLEV. VIXIT. AN. LXXXVI. Then, leaves folded in, Hercules streining two Snakes: and in a grave or Sepul∣cher-table, betweene two little images, of which the one holdeth the Horne of A∣malthaea, in a worse character which cannot easily be read, D. M. Dii Manibus that is, To the dead ghost. SVCC. PETRONIAE VIXIT ANN. IIII. M j s, that is, Moneths. M. IIII. D. Dies, that is, Daies. D. XV. EPO. MVLVSET VICTISIRANA Filia Chariss ∣maefecerunt. FIL. KAR. FEC. A little beneath in the fragment of a stone in greater letters VRN. IOP. Betweene the West, and South gates, Ophiuchus enwrapped with a serpent, two mens heads with curled haire within the cope of the wall, a hare running, and an∣nexed thereto upon a stone in letters standing overthwart. VLIA. ILIA. A naked man laying hand as it were, upon a souldier, within the battlement also of the wall: two lying along kissing and clipping one another: a footeman with a sword brandishing and bearing out his shield, a footeman with a speare, and upon a stone with letters standing overthwart. III. VSA. IS VXSC. And Medusaes head with haires all Snakes. Along the said river of Avon, which now is heere the bound between this shire and Glocestershire, upon the banke Westward we have a sight of Cainsham, so name of one Keina, a most devout and holy British virgine, who (as the credulous age before∣time, perswaded many) transformed serpents into stones, because there be found there in Stone quarries, such strange workes of nature, when she is disposed to disport her∣selfe. For, I have seene a stone brought from hence resembling a serpent, winding round in manner of a wreath, the head whereof being somewhat unperfect bare up in the Circumference thereof, and the end of the taile tooke up the centre within. But most of these are headlesse. In the fields neere adjoyning, and other places beside, is found Percepier, Percepier. an hearbe peculiar unto England. Bitter it is in taste, and hath a biting sharpenesse withall: it never groweth above a span high, and commeth up all the yeare long of it selfe: small leavy flowers of a greenish hew it beares, without any stalke at all: Which herbe mightily, and speedily provoketh urine: and of it the distilled water serveth for great use, as P. Paena in his Animadversions or Commentaries of Plants hath noted. Scarce five miles from this place, Bristow. the river Avon passeth through the midst of Bri∣stow, in Welch-British, Caer oder, Nant Badon, that is, The Citie Oder, in the Vale of Badon. In the Catalogue of ancient Cities, Caer Brito: In Saxon , that is, A bright or shining place. But such as have called it Venta Belgarum, have decei∣ved both themselves and others. This Citie standing partly in Somerset, and partly in Glocester-shires, is not to be reputed belonging either to this, or that, having Ma∣gistrates of the owne by it selfe, and being of it selfe entire, and a County incorporate. Scituate it is somewhat high betweene Avon and the little river Frome, sufficiently defended with rivers and fortifications together: For, environed it was sometime with a double wall. So faire to behold by reason of buildings as well publike as private, that it is fully correspondent to the name of Bright stow: With common Sewes or Sinks, (they call them Goutes ) so made to run under the ground for the con∣veiance, and washing away of all filth, that for cleanlinesse, and holesomnesse a man would not desire more: whereupon there is no use heere of carts: so well furnished with all things necessarie for a mans life, so populous, and well inhabited withall, that next after London, and Yorke, it may of all Cities in England justly challenge the chiefe place. For, the mutuall entercourse of trafficke, and the commodious haven, which admitteth in ships under saile into the very bosome of the Citie, hath drawne people of many countries thither. For the Avon, so often as the Moone declineth downeward from the meridian point, and passeth by the opposite line unto it, so swel∣leth with the tide from the Ocean, that it raiseth up the ships there riding, and lying in the oze 11. or 12. elles afloat in water. And the Citizens themselves are rich Mer∣chants, and trafficke all over Europe, yea, and make Voyages at sea so farre as into the most remote parts of America. But, when, and by whom it was built, it is hard to say. Old it seemeth not to be, for as much as in all those spoiles, and sackages that the Danes made, there is no mention of it in our Historians. And verily mine opinion is, that it first grew up to some name, when the English-Saxons Empire was much declining, seeing that it is no where named before the yeare of our Lord 1063; when Harold (as Florentinus of Worcester writeth) embarqued himselfe, and his armie, and put to sea from Bristow to Wales. In the first yeares of the Normans, Berton, a mannor adjoyning, And Bristow paid unto the King (as we find in the booke of Domesday) 110. markes of silver, and the Burgers said, that Bishop G. hath 33. markes, and one marke of Gold. After this, Robert Bishop of Constance that plotted seditious practises against King William Rufus, chose it for the seate-towne of the whole warre, fortified it, being then but a small Citie, with that inner (wall as I take it) which at this day is in part standing. But a few yeares after, the circuit thereof was every way enlarged. For on the South, Radcliffe, wherein there stood some small houses under the Citie side, is by a stone bridge, with houses on each hand built upon it, more like a streete than a bridge, joyned to the Citie: enclosed within a wall, and the Inhabitants thereof en∣franchised Citizens: yea & hospitals in every quarter thereof for the benefit of poore people, and faire Parish-Churches to the glorie of God were erected. The most beautifull of all which by farre, is S. Maries of Radcliffe without the walles, into which there is a stately ascent upon many staires: so large withall, so finely, and curiously wrought, with an arched roofe over head of stone artificially embowed, a steeple also of an exceeding height, that all the Parish-Churches in England which hetherto I have seene, in my judgement it surpasseth many degrees. In it, William Cannings the founder, hath two faire monuments: upon the one lieth his image portraied in an Aldermans roabe: For, five times he had beene Major of this Citie: upon the o∣ther, his image likewise in sacerdotall habite; for that in this old age hee tooke the orders of priesthood, and was Deane of that colledge which himselfe instituted at Westburie. There is hard by, another Church also, which they call the Temple, the lanterne or tower whereof when the bell rings shaketh to and fro, so as it hath cloven and divided it selfe from the rest of the building, and made such a chinke from the bottome to the top, as it gapeth the bredth of three fingers, and both shutteth and openeth whensoever the bell is rung. And heere I must not overpasse in si∣lence S. Stephens Church, the tower steeple whereof being of a mightie heighth, one Shipward, alias Barstable, a Citizen and Merchant, within the memorie of our grand∣fathers, right sumptuously, and artificially built. From the East-side also & the North, augmented it was with a number of edifices, enclosed within a wall and fenced with the river Frome, which having runne by the wall side gently falleth into the Avon, and yieldeth a dainty harbour for ships, with a wharfe convenient for the shipping and unlading of Merchandise in and out, (they call it the Kay. ) Under which be∣tweene the confluences of Avon and Frome, there is a plaine beset round about with trees, yielding a most pleasant walking place: South-east, where no rivers are to guard it, Robert the base sonne of King Henry the First, whom they commonly name Robert Rufus, and Consull of Glocester, because he was Earle of Glocester, built a large and strong Castle for the defence of this Citie; and of a pious and devout affection appointed every tenth stone to the building of a Chappell neere unto the Priory of S. Iames, which he likewise founded by the Citie side. This Robert had to wife Mabile the onely daughter and heire of Robert Fitz-Hamon, who held this towne by vassalage in Capite, of King William Conquerour. This Castle was scarce∣ly built, when King Stephen besieged it, but with lost labour: for, he was compelled to raise his siege and depart: and a few yeares after, was imprisoned in the same, giving thereby a testimony and proofe how uncertaine the chance of war is. Beyond the river Frome which hath a bridge over it, at Frome-gate there riseth an high hill, with a steepe and crooked ascent, so as it is painefull to goe up unto it: From whence ye have a most faire and goodly prospect to the Citie and haven underneath. This hill in the very top and pitch thereof, spreadeth presently into a large, greene and even plaine, which in the midst is shadowed with a double row and course of trees, and among them stands a pulpit of Stone, and a Chapell, wherein (by report) lieth enterred Iordan the companion of Augustine the Englishmens Apostle. Now it is converted to a Schoole, and on both sides (to say nothing of the neate and fine houses of private men) beautified it is with publike and stately buildings. Of the one side was a Collegiat Church called Gaunts, of the founder one Henry Gaunt Knight, who relinquishing the world, in this place betooke himselfe to the service of God: but now through the bounty of Thomas Carr a wealthy Citizen, converted to the keeping of Orphans: on the other side directly over against it stand two Churches dedicated to S. Augustine, the one (which is the lesse) a Parish-Church: the other, that is grea∣ter, the Bishops Cathedrall Church, endowed with sixe Prebendaries, by King Hen∣rie the Eighth: the greatest part whereof is now destroied, where the Colledge-gate workemanly built carrieth in the front this Inscription. REX HENRICVS II. ET DOMINVS RO∣BERTVS FILIVS HARDINGI FILII RE∣GIS DACIAE, HVIVS MONASTERII PRIMI FVNDATORES EXTITERVNT. That is, King Henry the Second, and Lord Robert the sonne of Harding, the King of Denmarks sonne, were the first founders of of this Monasterie. This Robert, Barons de Barkley. called by the Normans Fitz-Harding, descended of the bloud royall of Denmarke was an Alderman of Bristow, of King Henry the Second so entirely beloved, that by his meanes Maurice his sonne married the daughter of the Lord of Barkley. Whereby his posteritie, who flourished in great honor, are unto this day cal∣led Barons of Barkley ; and some of them have beene buried in this Church. From hence as Avon holdeth on his course, there are on each side very high cliffes by nature set there (as it were) of purpose, the one of them which on the East-side overlooketh the river beareth the name of S. Vincents rocke, so full of Diamonds, that a man may fill whole strikes or bushels of them. These are not so much set by, because they be so plentious. For, in bright, and transparent colour they match the Indian Diamonds, if they passe them not: in hardnesse onely they are inferior to them; but in that nature her self hath framed them pointed with sixe cornerd or foure cornerd smooth sides; I thinke them therefore worthy to be had in greater admiration. The other rock also on the West-side is likewise full of Diamonds, which by the wonder∣full skill and worke of nature, are enclosed as young ones within the bowels of hol∣low, and reddish flints: for, here is the earth of a red colour. When Avon hath left these rocks behind him, with full channell at length he disengorgeth himselfe into the Severn-sea. Then remaineth now to reckon up the Earles and Dukes of this County. Earles, and Dukes of So∣merset. The first Earle of Somerset, by tradition, was William de M hun, or Moion, who may seeme to be the very same, whom Maude the Empresse in a charter whereby she created Willi∣am de Mandevill Earle of Essex, taketh as a witnesse under this name, Comes. W. de Moion. Neither from that time meete we with any expresse and apparent mention of Earles of Somerset, Patents. Anno primo Henric. tertii. unlesse it be in these letters Patents of King Henrie the Third, unto Peter de De malo lacu. Mawley, which, that I may draw out the judgement of others, I will heere set downe literally. Know yee, that we have received the homage of our well beloved Vncle William Earle of Sarisbury for all the lands that he holdeth of us, & principally for the De Comitatu County or Earledom of Somerset, which we have given unto him with all appurtenances for his homage and service, saving the royaltie to our selves: and therefore we will & command you, that ye see he have full sesine of the foresaid Earledome, and all the appurtinances therto, and that ye entermeddle not in any thing from henceforth, as touching the County or Earle∣dome aforesaid, &c. And commandement is given to all Earles, Barons, Knights, and Free∣holders of the County of Somerset, that unto the same Earle they doe fealtie, and homage, sa∣ving their faith and allegiance unto their soveraigne Lord the King, and that from hence∣forth they be intentive and answerable unto him as their Lord. Whether by these words in the Patent he was Earle of Somerset, as also of Denshire (for, of the same Willi∣am he wrote likewise in the very same words unto Robert de Courtney ) I leave for other men to judge. Under this King Henry the third (as wee finde in a booke writ∣ten in French, which pertaineth to the house of the Mohuns Knights) it is recorded, that Pope Innocentius in a solemne feast, ordained Reginald Mohun Earle de Ests, (that is, as the Author doth interpret it, Of Somerset) by delivering unto him a golden conse∣crated rose, and an yearely pension to be paied upon the high Altar of S. Pauls, in London. So that this Reginald may seeme to have beene not properly an Earle ; but an A∣postolicall Earle. Earle Apost¦licall. For, so were they termed in those daies who had their creation from the Bishop of Rome, (like as they were called Earles Imperiall whom the Em∣peror invested) and such had power to institute Notaries and Scribes, to legitimate such as were base borne, &c. under certaine conditions. A long time after Iohn de Beaufort the base sonne of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster by Katherine Swineford, being made legitimate by King Richard the Second, See Earles o Dorset. together with his brethren and sister, with consent of the Parliament, was preferred to the honor of Earle of Somer∣set, and afterwards created Marquesse Dorset; but soone after deprived thereof by King Henrie the Fourth, having the title onely of the Earle of Somerset left un∣to him. The said Iohn had three sonnes, Henry Earle of Somerset, who died in his tender age; Iohn, created by King Henry the Fifth, the first Duke of Somerset, who had one sole daughter named Margaret, mother to King Henry the Seventh: and Edmund who succeeded after his brother in the Dukedome: and having beene a cer∣taine time Regent of France, being called home, and accused for the losse of Nor∣mandie, after hee had suffred much grievance at the peoples hands in that regard, was in that wofull war betweene the houses of Lancaster and Yorke slaine in the first battaile of S. Albans. Henrie his sonne being placed in his roome, whiles hee served the times, siding one while with Yorke, and anotherwhile with Lancaster, in the battaile at Exham was by those of the houses of Yorke: taken prisoner, and with the losse of his head paied for his unconstant levitie. Edmund his brother succeeded him in his honor, who of this family was the last Duke of Somerset, and when the whole power of the Lancastrians was discomfited at Tewkesbury, was forcibly pulled out of the Church into which all embrued with bloud he fled as into a Sanctuary, and then beheaded. Thus all the legitimate males of this family being dead and gone, first King Henry the Seventh honored with title Edmund his owne son a young child, who shortly departed this world: afterwards King Henry the Eighth, did the like for his base sonne, named Henry Fitz-Roy. And seeing he had no children, King Edward the Sixth, invested Sir Edward de Sancto Mauro, commonly, Seimor, with the same honour, who being most power-able, honorable, and loaden with titles, for thus went his stile, Duke of Somerset, Earle of Hertford▪ Vicount Beauchamp, Baron Seimor, Vncle to the King, Governor of the King, Protector of his Realmes, Dominions, and subjects, Lieute∣nant of the forces by land and sea, Lord high Treasurer, and Earle Marshall of England, Captaine of the Isles Gernsey, and Iarsey, &c. Was sodainely overwhelmed, as it were by a disport of fortune which never suffereth suddaine over-great∣nesse to last long, and for a small crime, and that upon a nice point subtlely devised, and packed by his enemies, bereaved both of those dignities, and his life withall. In this Countie are numbred Parishes. 385. WILTONIAE Comitatus herbida Pl nicie nobilis vul o will Shire pars olim BELGARVM. WILSHIRE. W Il-shire, which also pertained to the BELGAR, called in the English-Saxon tongue, , in Latine commly ter∣med, Wiltonia, taking that denomination of Wilton, sometime the chiefe towne, like as it of the River Willy, is altogether a mediterranean or mid-land country. For, enclosed it is with Somersetshire on the West, Berkshire and Hampshire on the East; on the North, with Glocestershire; and on the South, with Dorsetshire, and a part of Hampshire. A Region, which, as it breedeth a number of warlike and hardy men, who in old time, with Cornwall and Denshire together challenged by reason of their manhood, and martiall prowesse the prerogative in the English armie of that regiment, which should second the maine battell, (as saith Iohn of Sarisburie in his Polycraticon ) so is it exceeding fertill, and plentifull of all things, yea, and for the varietie thereof, passing pleasant and delight∣some. The Northern and upper part, which they call, North-Wilshire, riseth up some∣what with delectable hils, attired in times past with large and great woods, (which now begin to grow thinne) and watered with cleare rivers. The river Isi or Ouze. For, Isis the principall, and, as it were Prince of all the English Rivers; which afterwards taketh to him the name of Tamisis, that is, Thames, being now as yet but little and shallow, together with other Rivers of lesse name, which I will speake of in their proper places, water it plentifully. The South part with large grassie plaines, feedeth innumerable flocks of sheepe, having his Rivers, swelling Brookes, and rils of everliving fountaines. The middest of this shire, which for the most part also, lieth even and plain, is divided overthwart from East to West, with a Dike of wonderfull worke, cast up for many miles together in length: Wansdike. The people dwelling there about, call it Wansdike, which upon an errour generall received, they talke, and tell to have beene made by the di∣vell upon a Wednesday. For in the Saxon tongue it is called, , that is to say, The Ditch of Wooden or Mercurie, and as it should seeme, of Wooden that false ima∣gined God, and Father of the English-Saxons. But I have alwaies beene perswaded, that the Saxons made it, as a limit to divide the two Kingdomes of the Mercians, and West-Saxons asunder. For, this was the very place of battell betweene them, whiles they strove one with another, to enlarge their Dominions. And neere unto this Dike standeth, Wodensburg a little Village, where Ceauline, the most warlike King of the West-Saxons, in the yeare of grace 590. whiles hee defended his Mar∣ches, in a bloudy fight, received such a foile and overthrow by the Britans and Eng∣lishmen, that he was forced to flie his countrey, and to end his daies in exile, a piti∣ous and lamentable spectacle, Dikes of the Marches. even to his very enemies. And at this Dike, to say nothing of other accidents, Ina the West-Saxon, and Ceolred the Mercian, joyned battell, and departed the field on even hand: Like to this was that ditch, whereby King Offa kept the Britans off from his Mercians; called even at this day Offa-dike: others also are still to be seene, among the East-Angles in Cambridgeshire, and Suf∣folke, wherewith they limited their territory, and defended themselves from the in∣rodes and invasions of the Mercians. In the North-part of Wilshire, which is watered with Isis, or the Thames, there is a towne called Creckelade by Marianus, by others Greekelade of Greeke Philosophers, as some are ready to beleeve; who, as the historie of Oxford reporteth, began there an Universitie, Lediard. Saint Iohn which afterwards was translated to Oxford. West from that is High∣worth highly seated, a well knowne Market, but South from Creckelade, I saw Lediard Tregoze, the seat of the Familie of Saint-Iohn, Knights: the which Margaret de Bello Campo, or Beauchamp, afterwards Duchesse of Somerset, gave to Oliver of Saint Iohn her second sonne. For, to her it came as an inheritance, by Patishul, Grandison, and Tregoze, Wood-toun, or, Wotton Basset. names of great honour. Wotton Basset bordeth hard upon this, ha∣ving this primitive name from Wood, the addition doth prove, that it belonged to the Noble house of the Bassets. But in the latter fore-going age, it was (as I have heard say, the habitation of the Duke of Yorke, who made there a verie large Parke, for to enclose Deere in. Breden For∣rest. From hence Breden wood, now Breden Forrest, stretched it selfe farre and wide, which in the yeare 905. by Ethelwald Prince of the bloud. Clyto, and the Danes that aided him, was laid waste, and the Inhabitants endured all calamities of warre. On the West side whereof, the River Avon, above mentioned, gently runneth, which breaking forth almost in the North limit of this shire▪ keepeth his course south∣ward, and (as Aethelward noteth,) was sometime the bound betweene the Kingdoms of the West-Saxons, and the Mercians: upon which many great battels from time to time were fought: Malmesbury. whiles it is but small, he slideth under Malmesbury hill, and recei∣ving another streame, well neare encloseth the place. A very proper towne this is, and hath a great name for clothing, which (as wee read in the Eulogie of Histories) Cun∣wallow Mulmutius, King of the Britaines, built together with Lacok and Tetburie two Castles, and named it Caer Baldon, which being at length by heat of warres destroyed, out of the ruines thereof there arose, as writers record, a Castle which our Ance∣stors in their tongue, called, : at which time, the Saxon petie Kings had their royall palace at Caerdurburge, now Brokenbridge, a little village scarce a mile off. Neither verily was this towne for a long time knowne by any other name than Ingel∣borne, Ingleborne. untill one Maidulph an Irish Scot, Maidulph the Scot. a man of great learning, and singular holi∣nesse of life, taking delight to a pleasant grove, that grew up heere under the hill, lived for a time a solitary Heremite there: and afterwards teaching a Schoole, and with his schollers betaking himselfe to a monasticall life, built him a little monaste∣rie, or Cell. From this time, of that Maidulph, the towne began to bee called, Mai∣dulfesburge for Ingleborne, termed by Beda, Maidulphi Vrbs, that is, Maidulps Citie, and afterwards short, Malmesburies and in some of our Histories, and ancient Donations made unto this place, Meldunum, Malduburie, and Maldunsburg. Among the Disciples of this Maidulph, Aldeme. flourished chiefely Aldelme, who being elected his successour, by the helpe of Eleutherius, Bishop of the West-Saxons, unto whom the place of right belonged, built there a very faire Monasterie, and was himselfe the first Abbat thereof: of whom also in a certaine manuscript, this towne is called Aldel∣mesbirig. But this name soone perished, yet the memorie of the man continueth still: for canonized he was a Saint: and on his festivall day, there was heere kept a great Faire, at which usuall there is a band of armed men, appointed to keepe the peace among so many strangers resorting thither. And right worthy is he, that his memo∣rie should remaine fresh for ever, in regard, not onely of his Holinesse, but of his learning also, as those times were. For the first, he was of the English nation, who wrote in Latine, and the first that taught Englishmen the way, how to make a Latine verse: the which in these verses, hee both promised of himselfe, and performed, Primus ego in patriam mecum, modo vita supersit, Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas. I will be first, God lending life, that into country mine, From Aon top at my returne, shall bring the Muses nine. This Adelme after his death, Athelstane that Noble Prince, chose to be his pecu∣liar protector and tutelar Saint, and for that cause bestowed very great immunities upon this towne, William Malmesbury. and enriched the monasterie with a large and ample endowments. In which he made choise to bee buried, and his monument the Inhabitants shew to this day. After Athelstane, this Monasterie flourished long in continuall wealth, and among other famous Clerks, and great Scholars, brought forth William surnamed thereof Malmesburiensis, unto whom for his learned industry, the Histories of Eng∣land both Civill, and Ecclesiasticall, are deepely indebted. The towne also main∣tained and upholden, as it were, by the meanes of the Monasterie, was likewise for∣tified by Roger Bishop of Salisburie, who in the beginning of the warres betweene Henrie of Anjou, and King Stephen strengthned it with walls, and a Castle, which being once besieged by King Henrie the Second, defended it selfe. Moreover that magnificent Bishop, both here and at Salisburie built houses, for receit very large, for cost as sumptuous, and for shew right beautifull; so even and orderly were the stones couched, and laid together, that the joynts could not be seene, and the whole wall throughout seemed to the eie one entire stone. But the Castle not many yeares after by K. Iohns permission, was pulled downe to the use of the Monkes (for enlarg∣ing their monasterie) who encreased it still continually both in buildings, livings, and revenue, untill that fatall thunder-clap overthrew all the Monasteries of Eng∣land. Then their lands, Conucell at Aix. rents, and riches that had beene so many yeares in gathering, and heaping up together, which were (as our Forefathers reputed them) The vowes of the faithfull, the ransome and redemption of sinnes, and the patrimonies of poore people, were quite scattered: and the very Minster it selfe should have sped no better than the rest, but beene demolished, had not T. Stumpes a wealthy clothier, by much suit, but with a greater piece of money, redeemed and bought it for the townesmen his neighbours, by whom it was converted to a Parish-Church, and for a great part is yet standing at this day. From this Maiduphus Citie, Dantesey. or Malmesburie, as Avon runneth, it commeth to Dante∣sey, that gave name unto the possessions thereof, worshipfull Knights of old time in this tract: from whom by the Easterlings, commonly called Stradlings, it came unto the family of the Danvers. Out of which, Henry Danvers, through the favor of King Iames, Baron Dan∣vers. obtained of late the title and honour of Baron Danvers of Dantesey. Sixe miles from hence, Avon taketh unto him from the East, a Brooke, which runneth through Calne, Calne. an old little towne scituate upon a stony ground, having in it a faire Church to commend it: at which place when great adoe there was betweene the Monkes, and Priests about single life, a frequent Provinciall Councell, or Synod was holden in the yeare of our redemption, A Synode as touching the single life of Priests. 977. But behold, whiles they were debating the matter, the Convocation house, wherein the States sat, by breaking of the maine timber-worke, and falling asunder of the floore, fell suddenly downe, together with the Prelates, Nobles, and Gentlemen there assembled: with the fall whereof many were hurt, and more slaine outright: onely Dunstane, President of the said Counsell, and held with the Monkes, escaped without harme: which miracle (for so that age took it) is thought wonderfully to have credited the profession of Monkerie, and weakened the cause of married Priests. From hence Avon now growne greater, Chippinham. Chippenham, in Saxon Cyppanham, of note at this day for the market there kept; whereof it tooke the name: For, Cyp∣pan, in the Saxon tongue, Cyppan, what it is. is as much to say as to buy, and Cyppman, a buyer, like as with us, Cheapen, and Chapman: and among the Germans, Coppman. But in those daies, it was the Kings manour: and by King Elfred in his testament, bequeathed to a younger daughter of his. Nothing is there now worth the sight but the Church, built by the Barons Hungerford, as appeareth every where by their coats of Armes set up thereon. Directly over against this, but somewhat farther from the banke, li∣eth Cosham, Cosham. now a little village, but sometime King Etheldreds mansion house, and for that the Earles of Cornwall, were wont to retire themselves, and sojourne there, it was of good account: Castlecombe. within view whereof, is Castlecombe, an old Castle, enno∣bled sometimes by the Lords of it, the Walters of Dunstavill, men of great renowne in their time: Dunstavile. out of whose house, the Writhosleies Earles of Southampton are de∣scended, Pernell. Petronilla or Parnell daughter and sole heire of the last Walter, was wed∣ded unto Robert de Montfore, and bare unto him William his Sonne, who sold this Castle, with the rest of his lands, and possessions unto Bartholomew Badilsmer: from whom (as I have heard) it passed to the Scr opes, who ever since have held it. But now returne we unto the river: Leckham. upon which are seated, Leckham, the possession of the noble family of the Bainards, where pieces of Roman money have oftentimes beene found: Lacocke. and Lacocke, where the most godly and religious woman, Dame Ela Countesse of Salisburie (being now a widdow) built a Monasterie, (like as shee did another at Henton ) in the yeare 1232. to the honour of the blessed Virgin Marie, and Saint Bernard, in which her selfe devoutly dedicated, both her bodie and soule to the service of God. Avon from hence shadowed with trees, holding on his course, not far from Brum∣ham, an inhabitation (in times past) of the Baron Samond, or truly De Sancto Amando, Saint Amand, Saint Amand Barons. The Vies. Devizes. afterward of the Baintons from them: before hee admitteth to him a little rivelet from the East, that putteth forth his head neere unto the Castle De Vies, Devizes, or the Vies. Florentius of Worcester calleth it Divisio, and Neubergentis, Divisae. Heretofore a stately place, I assure you, very strong as well by naturall sci∣tuation, as by mans hand, but through the injurie of time, now decaied and defaced. This Castle, that it might disgrace, and put downe all other Castles in England, Ro∣ger Bishop of Salisburie (whom from a poore masse-Priest, Fortune had exalted unto the highest authoritie next the King) at his excessive charges built. But Fortune (as one saith) hath set no man so high, but she threatneth to take from him as much, as she hath permitted him to have. For, King Stephen upon a displeasure, wrung from him both this Castle, and that also of Shirburne, together with all his wealth and riches, as great as it was, yea, and brought the silly old man so low in prison, what with hunger, and what with other miseries, that betweene the feare of death, and tor∣ments of this life, he had neither will to live, nor skill to die. At which time was han∣dled, canvased, or rather tossed to and fro, this question, whether by the Canons and Decrees of Church, Bishops might hold Castles; or if this be by indulgence tolera∣ted, whether they ought not in dangerous and suspected times, surrender them up in∣to the Kings hands. Avon having received this rivelet to beare him company, maketh away westward: and straight waies another brook from the South runneth into him, which hath given name to the house standing upon it, called likewise Barons Brooke, which as it afforded habitation in old time to Iohn Pavely, Lord of Westburie Hundred, so afterwards it gave the title of Baron, to Robert Willoughby, because by the Chenies hee derived his pedigree from Paveley, what time as King Henrie the Seventh, advanced him to a Ba∣rons dignitie, as being high in his favour, Steward of his house, and appointed (by re∣port) for a while, Admirall. Whereupon he used the Helme of a ship for a seale in his ring, like as Pompey in times past, Governour of the Roman Navie, the stemme or Prow thereof in his coines. But this family fading, as it were, and dying in the ve∣rie blade, quickly came to an end. For, he left a sonne Robert Lord Brooke, who of a former wife, begat Edward his sonne that died before his father, leaving a daughter married to Sir Foulke Grevil, and of a second wife two daughters, by whom a great inheritance, and rich estate, conveied to the Marquesse of Winchester, and Lord Montjoy. Edindon. Neere unto this, Eastward lieth Edindon, in old time Eathandune, where King Al∣fred in as memorable a battell as any time else, most fortunately vanquished the bold, insolent, and outragious Danes, and drave them to this hard passe, that they swore in a set forme of oath, forthwith to depart out of England. In which place also William de Edindon, Bishop of Winchester, whom King Edward highly favoured, here borne and taking his name from hence, erected a Colledge, Bon-hom∣mes. Bonis hominibus, Bon-homes, as they called them, that is, for good men. But at the little river aforesaid, somewhat higher, Trubridge. standeth upon a hill Trubridge, sometimes , that is, a sure and trusty bridge. But for what cause this name was set upon it, it is not for certaine knowne. In great name and prosperitie it is in these daies, by reason of clothing, and sheweth the remaines of a Castle, which belongeth to the Duchie of Lancaster, and some∣time of the Earle of Salisburie. Bradford. Anno 652. Avon thus increased by this rivelet, watereth Brad∣ford, in the foregoing times Bradanford, (so named of a broad foard) scituate upon the descent or fall of an hill, and built all of stone: where Kenilwalch King of the West-Britans, embrued his sword wiuh bloud in civill warre against Cuthred his neere kins∣man. Here Avon biddeth Wil-shire farewell, and entreth closely into the Countie of Somerset, minding to visit the Bathes. The West limit of this shire goeth downe directly from hence Southward, by Long-leat, Long-Leat. the dwelling place of the Thins, (descended from the B ttevils ) a verie faire, neate, and elegant house, in a foule soile, which although once or twice it hath beene burnt, Maiden Brad∣ley. hath risen eftsones more faire. Also, by Maiden Bradley, so called of one of the Inhabitants of Manasses Basset, a most noble personage in his time, who being her selfe a maiden infected with the leprosie, founded an house heere for mai∣dens that were lepers, and endowed the same with her owne Patrimonie and Livetide, like as her Father before time had thereabout erected a Priorie: Like∣wise, by Stourton, the seate of the Lords Stourton, whom King Henry the Sixth raised to this dignitie, after their esta e had beene much bettered in lands and reve∣nues, by marriage with the Daughter and heire of the family, Le Moigne, or Monke of Essex, and not of Mohun, as some hitherto have beene falsely perswaded: and hereupon it is, that they have borne for their Crest, A Demi-Monke, with a whip in his hand. The place tooke his name of the River Stour, that under this towne walmeth out of sixe fountaines: which the Stourtons Lords of the place, have brought into their shield sables. By Maiden Bradley above said, glideth Dever-rill, Dever-rill. a prettie small Rill, so called, for that, like as Anas in Spaine, and Mole in Surrey, (which tooke their names there∣upon) it divideth (as it were) under the ground, and a mile off rising up here againe, ha∣steneth toward VERLVCIO, Verlucio. a most antient towne, whereof the Emperor Antonine maketh mention in his Itinerarie: which having not quite lost the name, is called, Werminster, Werminster. compounded of that old name, and the English Saxon word, , which signifieth, a Monasterie. In times past, it enjoyed great immunities and freedomes: For, as wee reade in the Booke of King William the Great, Nec gelda∣vit, nec hidata fuit: that is, It paid no tribute, nor was rated by the Hide. Now onely, for a round Corn-market, it is exceeding much frequented: for hardly a man would believe what a mightie deale of Corne is weekely brought hither, and quickly sold. But for remnants of Roman Antiquities, I could discover none here, onely on the East side are seene some trenches upon the hills, and on the West, a naturall round and high copt hill, called, Clay-hill. Heere by beginneth, North, South, and Eastward through the midst of the Shire, the Plaines so wide and open, that hardly a man can see from one side to another, Sarisburie Plaines. and doe limit the Horizon; whereupon they are named, The Plaines, they are but rarely inhabited, and had in late time a bad name, for rob∣beries there committed. On the South side thereof, there runne quietly two most still Rivers, Willey-borne, which Asserius nameth Guilou, and Nadder, commonly called, Adder-bourne. Wille-bourne rising at Werminster, runneth neere Heitesburie, or Hegtresburie an ancient mansion place of the Family of Hungerford ; Lord Hun∣gerford of Heitesburie. but in the Church which hath beene Collegiate, there is seene but one defaced monu∣ment of them. The last Lord Hungerford, created by King Henry the Eighth, had his denomination of this place, but enjoyed that honour a short while be∣ing condemned of a crime not to bee uttered. Hence it hieth to Willy, a Vil∣lage some few miles distant: over against it a very large warlike fence or hold, and the same fortified with a deepe and duple Ditch: the neighbour-dwellers call it Yanesburie Castle. And by the forme and manner of making, a man may easily know it was a Roman Campe. Yanesburie. There are, who verily thinke it was Vespasians Campe, considering that hee being Lieutenant of the twentieth Legion under Claudius the Emperour, subdued unto the Roman Empire, two nations in this tract: and they suppose that in the name Yanesburie, there remaine some reliques still of Vespasians name. Opposit to this on the other side the water, is another lesse camp-place singly ditched, called Dun-shat, and about one mile and a halfe from Yanesburie, another likewise with a single trench, named Woldsbury. I have noted the names as the country people tearme them, that other may collect some matter thereby more than I can. As for Nadder, that springeth out of the South limit of the shire, it creepeth with crooked windings, like an Adder, (whereof it may seeme to have beene so called) not farre from Wardour, Wardour Castle. a proper fine Castle, appertaining sometime to the Progenie, sur∣named Saint Martins. But (to say nothing of many owners betweene, and amongst them of the Lord Brooke, who repaired it, and died at it) now it belongeth to Tho∣mas Arundell, Baron Arun∣dell. who being of late by King Iames, created Baron Arundell of War∣dour, is worthy to be with praise remembred: For, that being a young Gentleman, hee of a pious and godly mind, undertaking a journey to serve in the warres against the Turkes, sworne enemies of Christendome, for his singular prowesse shewed at the winning of Strigonium in Hungarie, deserved by honourable Charter, (from Rodolph the Second of that name, Emperour) to bee made a Count of the Empire, the tenour of which Patent, is thus: For that hee had borne himselfe valiantly, and manfully in the field, Aquatic m. and in assaults of Cities and Castles, and shewing good proofe of valour in forcing of the water tower neere Strigonium, tooke from the Turkes with his owne hand their Banner, 1595. both himselfe, and all, and every one his children, heires and issue whatsoever of both sexes, Count Impe∣riall. descending from him lawfully, either borne already, or that ever shall, from generation to generation bee borne, wee have created, made, and named Counts, and Coun∣tesses, have endowed, and adorned, and with the title, honour, and dignitie of a Count impe∣riall. Over against it lieth Hach, a place at this day of small reckoning, but which in the time of King Edward the First, L. Hach. had his Lord Eustach de Hach, summoned among the Peeres of the Realme for a Baron, unto the high Court of Parliament. And a few miles from thence is Hindon a quicke market, Hindon. and knowne for nothing else that I could see. Wilton. At the meeting of these two rivers, Willey giveth his name to Wilton, a place well watered, and sometime the head towne of the whole Shire, which thereof tooke the name. In ancient times it was called Ellandunum: for so we are enformed by the testi∣monie of old parchment records, which have in expresse termes Weolsthan Earle of Ellandunum, Ellandunum. that is to say, of Wilton: and in another place, that hee founded a little Monasterie at Ellandunum, that is, at Wilton. By this name Ellan, I am partly induced to thinke, Alan the river. that this is the river Alan, which Ptolomee mentioneth in this coast of the Countrey. At this towne it was, that in the yeare of our redemption 821. Egbert King of the West-Saxons, obtained a victorie against Beor Wulf of Mercia, but so mortall a battell it was to both parties, that the river flowed commixt with the bloud of those, who were allied in bloud, and dissevered in faction. At this towne also in the yeare of salvation 871. Aelfrid joyning battell with the Danes, had the better hand at first, but immediately the alternative fortune of war comming about, hee was put to the worst, and driven to retire. In the Saxons time it flourished with the best in num∣bers of Inhabitants, and King Eadgar, as our Chronicles beare witnes, beautified it with a Nunnery, whereof he made his owne daughter Edith, Prioresse. But by the an∣cient Charter of Eadgar himselfe, bearing date, An. 874. it appeareth certainly to bee of more antiquitie. For, therein it is thus written: The Monasterie which by King Ed∣ward my great Grandfathers Grandfather, was founded in a well frequented, and peopled place, that by a knowne name is by the Inhabitants called Wilton. And in the life of Saint Edward the Confessor, we read thus, Whiles S. Edward went in hand with the building of the Monasterie of S. Peter in Westminster, Editha his wife began at Wilton (where shee was brought up) a Monastery princely built of stone, in lieu of the Church, made of timber, following the Kings good affection with the like devotion of her owne. And albeit Sueno the Dane spoiled this towne most grievously in the raging heate of hostilitie, yet fell it not so greatly to decay, untill the Bishops of Salisbury turned another way, the common passage that lay before through it, into the West countries. For, then by little and little it fell to ruine, and is now, as it were, a small Village, having nothing to boast of, but a Major, for the head Magistrate, and in it a passing fine house of the Earles of Pembrokes, raised out of the ruines of the old religious house. But most of all, Sorbiodunum. it was over-topped, and shadowed first by SORBIODVNVM, and now by Salisburie, that is risen out of the ruine thereof. For, so Antoninus in his Iti∣nerarie, calleth that which the Saxons afterwards named, , and the vulgar Latinists Sarum, Sarisburia, & Salisburialia. Moreover, the account taken by miles of distant places from it, and the tracts remaining of the name, testifie no lesse, if I should say never a word. For, who would ever make doubt, that Searesbirig proceeded from Sorbiodunum, by addition of the Saxon word, , which signifieth, a Burg or town, in stead of Dunum, What Dunum signifieth among the Britaines and Gaules. which the Britaines and Gaules, both used to put unto places sea∣ted on higher grounds, such as this Sorbiodunum was: In so much (as I have beene told by one right skilfull in the British tongue) that Sorviodunum, is by interpretation, as much, as The dry hill: a conjecture surely more probable that theirs, who with much adoe have derived the name from one Saron in Berosus, or from the Emperour Severus, and have named it, forsooth, Severia. For it mounted upon a high hill, and as our Historiographer of Malmesburie saith, Instead of the Citie, there was a Castle fenced with a wall of no small bignesse, indifferently well provided otherwise of necessaries, but so scant of water, that it is good chaffer there, sold at a wonderfull price. Whereupon these verses were made of old Sorbiodunum, by one living in those daies. Est tibi defectus lymph , sed copia cretae, Saevit ibi ventus, sed philomela silet. No water there, but chalke yee have at will: The winds there sound, but nightingales be still. By the ruines yet remaining, it seemeth to have beene a strong place sufficiently fortified, and to have contained in circuite some halfe a mile. Kinric the Saxon, after he had wonne a most fortunate Victorie of the Britans, was the first of all the Saxons that forced it, in the yeare 553: and Canutus the Dane about the yeare 1003. by set∣ting it on fire, did much harme unto it. But it revived, when by the authority of a Synode, and the ascent of William the Conqueror, Herman Bishop of Shirburne and Sunning, translated his See hither: whose next successour Osmund built a Cathedrall Church. And King William the Conquerour, after he had taken the survey of Eng∣land summoned all the States of the Kingdome hither, to sweare unto him fealtie: at which time (as it stands upon record in Domesday booke) it payd after the rate of 50. hides. Or, for money weigh∣ed out and told. Of the third penny of Salisbury the King hath xx shillings. ad pensum, de Cremento, IX. libras ad pondus. Which I note therefore, because in our forefathers daies, like as a∣mong the old Romans, money was wont to bee paied as well by the weight as tale. but not many yeares after, in the raigne of Richard the first, partly for the insolencie and mis-rule that the garison souldiers made there, against the Church-men, and in part for want of water, the Church-men first, and then the Inhabitants began to leave it, and planted themselves in a lower ground scarce a mile off, South-East from it, where there is a receit, as it were, of many rivelets, and where Avon and Nadder meet. Of this their removing Petrus Of Bloys. New Saris∣burie. Blesensis in his Epistles maketh mention. For, thus of old Salisburie he wrote. A place that was, open to the winds, barraine, dry, and desert: In it stood a towre, like that of Siloam, which oppressed the townes-men with the burthen of long servitude. And againe: The Church of Sarisburie was captive in that hill. Let us therefore in Gods name goe downe to the plaine countrey, where the valleies will yield store of wheat and other corne, where also the large fields are rich fat in pasture. And the Poet afore-said, in verse thus: Quid Domini domus in castro? nisi foederis arca In templo Baalim; carcer uterque locus. What is Gods house in Castle pent, but like the Arke of blisse In Baalims temple Captivate? Each place a prison is. And the place whereunto they descended he thus describeth: Est in valle locus nemori venatibus apto Contiguus, celeber fructibus, uber aquis. Tale Creatoris matri, natura creata Hospitium toto quaesijt orbe diu. Neere to a Parke well stor'd of game, there lies in vale, a ground, Where corne and fruits in plentie grow, where water-streames abound. Such lodging long throughout the world, when nature daughter deere, Had for Creatours mother sought, at last she found it heere. When they were now come downe, because they would begin first with the house of God, Richard Poore the Bishop, in a most delectable place, named before Meri∣field, began to found a most stately, and beautifull Minster. Which with an exceeding high spired steeple, and double crosse yles on both sides, carrying with it a venerable shew as well of sacred hilaritie as religious majestie, was with great cost finished forty yeares after: and in the yeare of our Lord 1258. dedicated even in the presence of King Henrie the third: Whereof the said old Poet hath these prety verses: Regis enim virtus temple spectabitur isto. Praesulis affectus, artificum{que} fides. For why? This Church a Prelats zeale sets forth unto the sight, The workmens trusty faithfulnesse, a Princes power and might. But much more elegantly the most learned Daniel Rogers, as concerning the said Church: Mira canam, Soles quot continet annus in una Tam numerosa, ferunt, ade, fenestra micat. Marmoreas{que} capit fusas tot ab arte columnas, Comprensas horas▪ quot vagus annus babet. Tot{que} patent portae, quot mensibus annus abundat, Res mira, at verares celebrata fide. Wonders to tell: How many daies in one whole yeare there beene, So many windows in one Church (men say) are to be seene. So many pillars cast by Art, of marble there appeare, As houres doe flit and flie away throughout the running yeare. So many gates doe entry give, as monthes one yeare doe make, A thing well knowne for truth though most it for a wonder take. For, the windowes as they reckon them answer just in number to the daies, the pillars great and small, to the houres of a full yeare, and the gates to the twelve monethes. A cloister it hath beside on the South side, for largenesse and fine work∣manship inferiour to none: whereunto joyneth the Bishops pallace, a very faire and goodly house: and on the other side a high bell towre and passing strong withall, stan∣ding by it selfe apart from the Minster. Moreover, in short time it grew to be so rich in goods, and endowed with so great revenewes, that it still maintained a Deane, a Chaunter, a Chauncellor, a Treasurer, and three and thirty Prebendaries: of whom the Residents, as they terme them, have very goodly houses also adjoyning to the Church, and all these buildings stand within the close wall severed from the Citie. As the Bishop was busied about erecting of Gods house, the Citizens likewise for their parts did their best to found the Citie, they established their civill government, derived rilles and servers of waters into every street, and cast a deepe ditch all along that side, on which it is not fenced with the running river, having obtained licence of Simon the Bishop thus to strengthen and fortifie the same. And in such sort grew up this new Salisburie by little an little, out of the ruines of old Sorbiodunum, that so soone as they by the Kings warrant, had turned hither the high-way, that leadeth into the West parts, it became the second Citie in all this tract, passing well inhabited and frequented, plentifull of all things, especially of fish, adorned with a very stately mar∣ket place, wherein standeth their common Hall of timber worke, a very beautifull edifice. But nothing is there, whereof it may so much boast, as of Iohn Iowell not long since Bishop there, a wonderfull great, and deepe Divine, a most stout and ear∣nest maintainer of our reformed religion against the adversaries by his learned books. Old Sorbiodunum from thence forward decaied more and more, and in the raigne of King Henrie the Seventh, became utterly desolate, so as at this day, there remai∣neth onely a towre or two of the Castle, which notwithstanding a long time after the departure of the townesmen from thence, was the dwelling house of the Earles of Salisburie: and about which in King Edward the Thirds time, there arose a memora∣ble controversie and suite. 29. Edw. 3. Tearm. Hillarii. Combat for the Castle of Sarum or Shirburn, as some will have it. For, Robert Bishop of Salisburie stirred Milliam Mont acute Earle of Salisburie by vertue of a processe which our Lawyers terme Breve de Recto, that is, A writ of right, for this Castle: and hee made answer that hee would defend his right by combat. Whereupon, at a day appointed, the Bishop rought forth his champion to the railes or bars of the Lists, cl d in a white garment reaching downe to his mid-leg: upon which he had a mandilian or cassocke garnished with the Bi∣shops Armes: at whose heeles followed a Knight carrying a staffe, and a page with a shield: Immediately after, the Earle brought in by the hand his owne champion also, arraied in the like apparell, accompanied with two Knights bearing white staves. Now when these Champions were to enter the Lists, commanded they were to withdraw themselves aside, that their weapons of both parts might be viewed, and they searched whether they had any Amulers or Enchantments about them. But all on a suddaine, unlooked for came the Kings precept, to reprive and defer the matter to a further day, that the King might loose thereby none of his right. Meane while, they grew to this composition: That the Earle for the summe of 2500. markes paied and received, should yield up all his title and interest in the Castle, to the Bishop and his successors for ever. This Salisburie had long agoe Earles of that name, Earles of Sa∣lisburie. Historie of Lacock Ab∣bey. whose pedigree I will derive somewhat farther off and more truly out of the short reports of Lacock Historie. Wil∣liam Conqueror of his bounty & liberalitie, assigned unto Gualter de Evereaux Earle of Rosmar in Normandie, faire lands and large possessions in this shire, which he left unto Edward named de Sarisburia a younger sonne borne in England: like as to Wal∣ter his eldest sonne, other lands in Normandie, with the Title of Earle of Rosmar: whose issue within a while after was extinct. That Edward of Sarisburie aforesaid, flourished in the twentieth yeere of the Conquerours reigne, and is often times bare∣ly named, in the Indiciarie booke of England, without the title of Earle. His sonne Walter built a a little monasterie at Bradenstocke, and there in his old age tooke him to the habit of a Canon, or Regular priest, after he had first begotten his sonne Pa∣tricke (the first Earle of Salisburie ) upon Sibil de Cadurcis: This Patricke, I say, the first Earle, in his returne from his pilgrimage at S. Iames of compostella in Spain in the yeere of our Lord 1169. being slaine by one Guy of Lusigniam, left William his sonne to succeede: who died in King Richard the first his time. His onely daughter Ela, through the favour of the said King Richard, was married to William Long Espee, surnamed so of a long sword that he did usually weare, a base sonne of King Henrie the second; and her marriage honoured him with the title of Earle, and her owne coat of Armes be Azur: adorned with sixe Lions Ceux. This William had a sonne na∣med likewise William Long-Espee, against whom King Henrie the Third concei∣ving great displeasure, for that without licence obtained, he was gone to serve in the holy land, taking the crosse (as they termed it upon him) took from him both the ti∣tle of Earle and also the Castle of Salisburie. But he holding still his purpose went in∣to Egypt with S. Lewis King of France, and neere unto Damiata which the Christians had wonne, carrying a brave and valorous minde, fighting manfully among the thick∣kest troops of his enemies died an honorable and glorious death, a little before that holy King was unfortunately taken prisoner. Walsingham pag. 74. His sonne named likewise William, li∣ved without the title of Earle, and begat one onely daughter Margaret, who never∣thelesse being reputed Countresse of Salisburie, became the wife of Henry Lacy Earle of Lincoln, unto whom she bare one only daughter Alice wedded to Thomas Earle of Lancaster: Who being attainted, King Edward the Second seized upon those pos∣sessions, which she had granted and demised unto her husband: out of which King Edward the Third gave way unto Willam Mont-acute, Trowbridg, Winterbourn, Am∣bresburie, and other Lordships in these words: So fully and wholly as the Progenitours of Margaret Countesse of Salisbury at any time held the same. And even then, hee preferred the said William Mont-acute to be Earle of Salisburie, and by the cincture of a sword in∣vested him in the said Earledome. This William became Lord of the Isle of Mann, and begat two sonnes, William who succeeded in his Fathers honour, and died without issue having unhappily slaine his onely sonne while he trained him at Tilting: and Iohn a Knight, who died before his brother, leaving behind him a sonne named Iohn Earle of Salisburie, whom hee had by Margaret daughter and heire of Thomas de Mont-Hermer ; who being of an unconstant and changeable nature, and plotting the destruction of King Henrie the Fourth, was in the yeare of our Lord 1400. killed at Chichester, and attainted afterwards of high treason. Howbeit, his sonne Tho∣mas was fully restored, a man worthy to be ranged with the bravest Captaines and Commanders, whether you respect paines taking in his affaires, industrie in action, or expedition in dispatch, who lying at the siege before Orleance in France, was with a bullet levelled out of a great piece of Ordnance wounded in the yeare 1428. and thereof died. Pat. 2. Henr. 6. 1461. Alice his onely daughter, being wedded unto Richard Nevill aug∣mented his honour with the title of Earle of Salisburie, who siding with the house of Yorke, was in the battell fought at Wakefield, taken prisoner and beheaded: leaving to succeede him Richard his sonne, Earle of Warwicke and Salisburie; who de∣lighting in dangers and troubles enwrapped his native countrey within new broiles of Civill warre, wherein himselfe also left his life. The one of his daughters named Isabell was married unto George Duke of Clarence, brother to King Edward the Fourth, and shee bare him a sonne called Edward Earle of Warwicke who be∣ing a very child and innocent, was by King Henrie the Seventh beheaded like as his sister Margaret, suffered the same death under King Henrie the Eighth. An usuall pollicie and practise among suspicious Princes: For the securitie of their own persons and their posteritie, by one occasion or other, that evermore are soone offered and as quickly pickt, to make away or keepe under the next of their bloud. Anne, the o∣ther daughter of Richard Nevill Earle of Warwick and Salisburie, became wife to Richard Duke of Glocester, brother to King Edward the Fourth, and brought him a sonne, whom his uncle King Edward in the 17. of his reigne created Earle of Salisbu∣rie, and Richard his father usurping the kingdome made Prince of Wales. But he de∣parted this life in his tender yeares, about that time that his mother also died, not without suspition of poison. King Henry the Eighth afterward, about the fifth yeare of his raigne in a full Parliament restored and enabled in bloud Margaret daughter to George Duke of Clarence to the name, stile, title, honour, and dignitie of Countesse of Salisburie, as sister and heire to Edward late Earle of Warwick and Salisburie. And about the 31. yeare of the said King, she was attainted in Parliament with divers o∣thers, and beheaded when she was 70. yeares old. Since which time that title of honour was discontinued untill in the yeare of our Lord 1605. our Soveraigne Lord King Iames honored therewith S. Robert Cecill second sonne of that Nestor of ours; William Cecill: upon whom for his singular wisedome, great employments in the af∣faires of State to the good of Prince and Countrey, he had bestowed the honorable titles of Baron Cecill of Essendon, and Vicount Cranburn. Thus much of the Earles of Salisburie. Lower still, and not far from this Citie, is scituate upon Avon, Dunctone or Donke∣ton, a burrough (as they say) of great antiquitie, and well knowne by reason of the house therein of Beavois of Southampton, whom the people have enrolled in the number of their brave worthies for his valour commended so much in rhyme to posteritie. This Salisburie is environed round about with open fields and plaines, unlesse it be Eastward, where lieth hard unto it Clarindon, a very large and goodly parke, passing fit for the keeping and feeding of wild beasts, and adorned in times past with an house of the Kings. Of which parke, and of the twentie groves inclosed therein Master Mi∣chael Maschert Doctor of the Civill lawes, hath prettily versified in this wise. Nobilis est lucus, cervis clausura, This name himselfe poe∣tically devised. saronam Propter, & a claro vertice nomen habet. Viginti hinc nemorum partito limite, boscis Ambitus est passus mille cui{que} suus. A famous Parke for Stag and Hind, neere Salisbury doth lie, The name it hath of one faire downe or hill, that mounts on hie: Within the same stand xx. groves enclos'd with severall bound: Of which, in compasse every one a mile containes in ground. Famous is this Clarindon for that heere in the yeare 1164. was made a certaine recognition and record of the customes and liberties of the Kings of England, before the Prelates, and Peeres of the Kingdome, for the avoiding discentions betweene the Clergie, Constitutions of Clarinders. Iudges, and Barons of the Realme which were called The Constitutions of Clarnidon. Of the which so many as the Pope approved have beene set downe in the Tomes of the Councels, the rest omitted; albeit Thomas Becket then Archbishop of Canterburie, and the rest of the Bishops approved them all. Heereby is Jvy Church sometime a small Priory, where as tradition runneth, in our grandfathers remembrance was found a grave, and therein a corps of twelve foote, and not farre of a stocke of wood hollowed, and the concave lined with lead with a booke there∣in of very thicke parchment, An ancient booke. all written with Capitall Roman letters. But it had lien so long that when the leaves were touched they fouldred to dust. S. Thomas Eliot who saw it judged it to be an Historie. No doubt hee that so carefully laied it up, hoped it should be found, and discover somethings memorable to posteritie. Toward the North, about sixe miles from Salisburie, in these plaines before named, is to bee seeene a huge and monstrous piece of worke, such as Cicero termeth Insanam substructionem. Stone-henge. For, within the circuit of a Ditch, there are erected in man∣ner of a Crowne, in three rankes or courses one within another certaine mightie and unwrought stones, whereof some are 28. foote high, and seven foote broad, upon the heads of which, others like overthwart pieces doe beare and rest crosse-wise, with a small tenents and mortescis, so as le frame seemeth to hang: whereof wee call it Stonehenge, like as our old rmed it for the greatnesse Chorea Gigan∣tum; The Giants Daunce. The whereof, such as it is, because it could not be so fitly expressed in caused by the gravers helpe to bee portraied heere underneath as it weatherbeaten, and decaied. A. Stones called Corsestones, Weighing 12. tunne, carrying in height 24. foote; in breadth, 7. foote; in compasse, 16. B. Stones named, Cronetts, of 6. or 7. tunne weight. C. A place, where mens bones are digged up. Our countrie-men reckon this for one of our wonders and miracles. And much they marvaile: from whence such huge stones were brought, considering that in all those quarters bordering thereupon, there is hardly to be found any common stone at all for building: as also by what meanes they were set up. For mine owne part, about these points I am not curiously to argue and dispute, but rather to lament with much griefe that the Authors of so notable a monument are thus buried in oblivion. Yet some there are, that thinke them to bee no naturall stones hewne out of the rocke, but artificially made of pure sand, and by some glewie and unctuous matter knit and incorporate together, Made Stones. like as those ancient Trophies or monuments of victo∣rie which I have seene in Yorkshire. And what marvaile? Read we nor, I pray you, in Plinie, that the sand or dust of Puzzote. Puteoli being covered over with water, becommeth forthwith a very stone: that the cesternes in Rome of sand digged out of the ground, and the strongest kind of lime wrought together grow so hard, that they seeme stones indeed? and that Statues and images of marble chippings, and small grit grow toge∣ther so compact and firme, that they are deemed entire and solid marble: The com∣mon saying is, that Ambrosius Aurelianus, or his brother Vther did reare them up by the art of Merlin that great Magician. Mathematic . Mathematician, in memorie of those Britaines who by the treachery of Saxons were there slaine at a parley. Whereupon Alexander Nec m, a Poet of no great antiquitie, in a poeticall fit, but with no speciall grace, and favour of Apollo, having his instructions out of Geffreys British historie, come out of these verses: Nobilis est lapidum structura, Chorea Gigantum, Ars experta suum posse, peregit opus. Quod ne prodiret in lucem segniùs, artem Se, vires{que} suas consuluisse reor. Hoc opus adscribit Merlino garrula fama, Filia figmenti fabula vana refert. Illa congerie fertur decorata fuisse Tellus, quae mittit tot Palamedis aves. Hinc tantum munus suscepit Hibernia gaudens, Nam virtus lapidi cujlibet ampla satis. Nam respersus aquis magnam transfundit in illa Vim, queis curari sepiùs aeger eget. Vther Pendragon molem transvexit ad Ambri Fines, devicto victor ab hoste means. O quot nobilium, quot corpora sacra virorum, Illic Hengesti proditione jacent: Intercepta fuit gens inclita, gens generosa Intercepta, nimis credula, cauta minùs. Sed tunc enituit praeclari Consul Eldol Virtus, qui letho septuaginto dedit. The Giants Daunce, a famous stone-worke stands, Art did her best in bringing it to passe, Vaine prating fame, reports by Merlins hands In manner strange this worke effected was. The stones (men say) in their land first did lie, Scythia. Whence Palamedi aves. Cranes in flockes so many use to flie. From thence conveied, as things of charie price, The Irish soile received them with joy. For why? their vertue in a wondrous wise, Oft cures the griefe that doth sicke folke annoy. For, waters cast and sprinckled on these stones, Their vertue take, and heale the grieved ones. The noble Vther that Pendragon hight, Them over seas to Ambresburie brought; Returning thence, where he by martiall might Had quel'd his foes in battell fiercely fought. O worthy Wights, how many on that plaine, Of you lie dead by Hengists treason slaine! The Britans brave, that race of noble blood, Entrap't by little heed and too much trust, Were kild alas, in parley as they stood, Through faithlesse fraud of enemies unjust. But Eldol Earle his manhood excellent Then shewed, to death who seventie persons sent. Others say, that the Britaines erected this for a stately Sepulchre of the same Am∣brose in the very place where hee was slaine by his enemies sword: that hee might have of his countries cost such a piece of worke, and tombe set over him as should forever be permanent, as the Altar of his vertue and manhood. True it is, that mens bones have many times beene digged up heere, and the village lying now on Avons side, Ambresbury. is called Ambresburie, that is to say, Ambrose his towne: where, certaine an∣cient Kings, by the report of the British Historie, lay interred. And the booke called Eu gium saith, that a Monasterie stood there of three hundred Monkes: which, one Gurmundus (I wot not what Pagan and Barbarian) spoiled and rifled. In that place afterward Alfritha King Edgar his wife, by repentance and some good deed to expiate, and make satisfaction for murthering of King Edward her sonne in Law, built a stately Nunnerie, and endowed it with livings: In which Queene Eleanor King Henrie the Thirds widdow, renouncing all royall pompe, and princely state, de∣voted her selfe unto God among other holy Nuns. The said Ambrose Aurelianus, who gave name unto the place, Ambrosius Aurelianus. when the Romane Empire drew now to an end, toske upon him the Imperiall purple Roabe in Britaine, (as saith Paulus Diaconus ) suc∣coured his decaying countrey, and the aide of that warlike Arthur repressed the vio∣lent rage of the enemies, overthrew puissant armies, consisting of the most coura∣gious Nations of Germany, and at the last in a battell fought upon this Plaine, lost his life in the defence of his countrey. Now, seeing both Gildas, and Bede do write, that his Parents wore the purple Roabe, and were slaine, why may not I suppose him to be descended of that Constantine, The Empe∣rours before. who in the Fourth Consulship of Theodosius the younger, was elected Emperour heere in Britaine in hope of his luckie name, and afterwards slaine at Arles. I have heard that in the time of King Henrie the Eighth, there was found neere this place a table of mettall, as it had beene tinne and lead com∣mixt, inscribed with many letters, but in so strange a Caracter, that neither Sir Tho∣mas Eliot, nor master Lilye Schoole-master of Pauls, could read it, and therefore neglected it. Had it beene preserved, somewhat happily might have beene discove∣red as concerning Stonehenge, which now lieth obscured. Leporarium. Scarce foure miles from Ambresburie, (on this side Avon ) there is a Warren of hares, commonly called Everlie Warren, where there is great increase of hares for Gentlemen in the countrey there dwelling, to disport themselves with game: yet not such store as that the neighbour Inhabitants should require the helpe of souldiers in their defence against them, as the men of the Isles Baleares sometime did, by Pli∣nies relation: albeit, they did likewise much harme heere unto the Corne fields: and neere neighbour unto it is Lutgershall, where stood sometimes (as I read) the Ca∣stle of Geffrey Fitz-Peter, Wolshal. Lord chiefe Justice of England in his time, and Earle of Essex, a man of exceeding great wealth. Not much higher is Wolshall, which was the house of the Noble Familie of Seimo , now Earle of Hertford, or of Saint Maur, Estermie or Sturmy. to whom by marriage accrewed a great inheritance of the Est rmies in this tract, who bare argent three Demy-Lions Gules: and from the time of King Henrie the Second, were by right of inheritance, the Bailifes and Guardians of the Forrest of Savenac lying hard by, Savernac Forrest. which is of great name for plenty of good game, and for a kind of Ferne there, that yieldeth a most pleasant savour. In remem∣brance whereof, their Hunters orne of a mightie bignesse, and tipt with silver, the Earle of Hertford keepeth unto this day, as a monument of his progeni∣tours. More somewhat into the East, the River Cunetio, in the Saxon tongue , commonly Kenet, Kenet River. ariseth neere unto a little Village of the same name, which some would have to be that CVNETIO mentioned by Antoninus: but the distance of both sides gain-saieth it. Heere Selburie a round hill mounteth up aloft, to a great height, which by the forme of the hill it selfe, and the outward settling of the earth beneath, may seeme to have beene cast up by mans hand. And many of that sort, round and with sharpe tops are to bee seene in this tract: Burrowes they call them and Barrowes, Barrowes and Burrows. Tombes. raised, happily in memoriall of Souldiers there slaine. For bones are found in them, and read I have, how an usuall thing it was with the Northerne nations, that every souldier remaining alive after a foughten field, should carry his head-piece full of earth toward the making of their fellowes tombes that were slaine. Although I am of opinion rather, that this of Selburie, was set there in stead of a limit, if not by the Romans, then certainly by the Saxons: Like as that fosse called Wodensdike, considering that betweene the Mercians and the West-Saxons there was much bickering in this Shire many a time, In his Geo∣meotrie. about their Marches: and both 198. Boetius and the Aibury. Grammaticall Writers have made mention of such Mounts raised for bounds. Within one mile of Selburie, is Aiburie, an up-landish village built in an old Campe as it seemeth, but of no large compasse, for it is envi∣roned with a faire trench, and hath foure gappes as gates, in two of the which stand huge Stones as jambes, but so rude, that they seeme rather naturall than artificiall, of which sort, there are some other in the said village. This River Kenet runneth at the first Eastward, through certaine open fields, out of which there stand up aloft every where stones like rockes, Rockley. and off them a little village there is, called, Rockley: among which there breaketh out sometimes at unawares water in manner of a streame or sudden Land-flood, reputed the messenger, as it were, and forerunner of a dearth, and is by the rusticall people of the countrey, called Hunger-borne. From hence Famis rivu∣lus. Kenet holdeth on his course to a towne bearing his name, called of Antoninus CVNETIO, and is placed from Verlucio twenty miles. At which distance just, from thence, that ancient towne called by a new name Marleborow, in old time Marleberge, standeth upon this river Kenet. Cunetio, a towne. Marleborow. Cunetio, now Kenet, stretching out East and West on the pendant of an hill. Whether this name Marleborow came in latter ages of Marga, which in our language we call Marle, and use in stead of dung to manure our grounds, I am not ready to affirme. Certes, it lieth neere a chaulkey hill, which our Ance∣stours before they borrowed this name Chaulke of the Latine word Calx, Kenet. named Marle, But the Etymologie thereof, that Alexander Necham in his Booke of divine wisedome hath coined and drawne from Merlins Tombe (as appeareth by this Distichon of his making) is ridiculous. Merlini tumulus tibi Merlebrigia nomen Fecit, testis erit Anglica lingua mihi. O Merlebridge towne, of Merlins Tombe thou had'st thy name: Our English tongue will testifie, with me the same. The fatall end of this towne Cunetio, and the name together, and the estate thereof with the ancient memorie also, from the comming in of the Saxons unto the Normans time, is utterly vanished and gone: for, in all this space betweene, our histories doe not so much as once name it. But in the age next ensuing, wee reade, that Iohn Or nick-r med, Iohn Lack-land. surnamed Sine terra, that is, Without Land, (who afterwards was King of England) had a Castle heere, which when hee revolted from his bro∣ther King Richard the First, Hubert Archbishop of Canterburie, tooke by force: and which afterwards was most famous by reason of a Parliament there holden, wherein by a generall consent of the States of the Kingdome there assembled, a law passed for the appeasing of all tumults, commonly called, the Satute of Marleborow. But now being daunted by time, there remaineth an heape of rammell and rubbish witnessing the ruines thereof, and some few reliques of the walles remaine within the compasse of a drie ditch, and an Inne there is adjoyning thereto, which in stead of the Castle, hath the signe of a Castle hanging out at it: The Inhabitants of the place, The blacke Prince as they say. have nothing to make greater shew of, than in the Church of Preshut hard by, of a Christning Font, as it seemeth, of Touchstone, or of Obsidian stone, in which (by their report certaine Princes (I wot not who) were in times past bap∣tized, and made Christians. Neither verily can I conceale that which I have read, that every Burger heere admitted, is by an old order and custome among them, to present unto the Major, a brace of hounds for the hare, a couple of white Capons, and a white Bull. Ramesburie. On the same River, and the same side thereof, is seated Ramsburie, a pret∣tie village, having nothing now to commend it but pleasant meadowes about it, howsoever in old time famous it was for the Bishops See there, who had this Shire for their Diocesse: William Malmesburie, of Bishops. but that seate being by Herman the Eighth Bishop, laid unto that of Shirburne, and at length (as I said before) translated to Saliburie, carried away with it all the name and reputation of this place, because at Ramesburie, there was never any Covent of Clerkes, nor ought for their maintenance. Littlecot. From the other side of the River more Eastward, Littlecot sheweth it selfe not long since a seate of the Darels, a place worthy to bee re∣membred, for the late Lord thereof Sir Iohn Popham, who being the chiefe Iudge in the Kings Bench executed justice, (as I have said already) against malefactors, to his high praise and commendation. And heereby runneth the limit betweene this Shire, and Berkshire. Thus farre forth have we taken a slight view and survey of Wilshire, which (as wee find in the Domesday booke, and worth the noting it is) paide unto the King tenne pounds for an Hawke, twentie shillings Pro summario. Haply a Sumpter horse. Ore, what it is. for a strong Steed, for hey one hundred shillings, and five ores: now what kind a piece of money, and of what kind that Ore was, I wot not; but out of a Register of Burton Monaste∣rie, I have observed thus much, that twentie Ores, are worth two Markes of silver. Earles of Wil∣shire. This province can reckon out of divers and sundry houses, but few Earles, be∣sides those of Salisburie, whom I have named before: for to omit Weolsthan be∣fore the Normans Conquest, it had none to my knowledge, unto King Richard the Second his daies, who preferred William le Scrope to that one honour. But this mans good fortunes stood and fell together with his Prince. For, when the one was deposed, the other lost his head. After whom, within short time succeeded Iames Butler Earle of Ormund, advanced to that dignitie by King Henrie the Sixth. Howbeit, when the Lancastrians were downe the wind, and hee was attainted, his estate forfeited, and Iohn Stafford a younger sonne of Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, by the favour of King Edward the Fourth received this title, whose sonne Edward succeeded him, and died without issue. The same ho∣nour afterwards King Henrie the Eighth, bestowed upon Henrie Stafford of the same house of Buckingham; who having enjoyed it a little while, departed like∣wise, and left no children behind him. In the end, the favour of the said King brought it into the family of the Bullens: for Thomas Bullen Vicount Rochfort, Sonne to one of the Daughters and coheires of Thomas Butler Earle of Ormund, hee created Earle of Wilshire: whose Daughter Anne, the King tooke to wife: A marriage this was to her selfe, and her brother unhappie and deadly, to her Parents wofull, but for all England right happy. For it brought forth to us Queene Elizabeth, Queene Eli∣zabeth. a most gracious and excellent Prince, worthy of superlative praise, for her most wise and politique government of the Common-wealth, and for her heroicke vertues farre above that sexe. But when the said Thomas Bul∣len, overcome with the griefe and sorrow that hee tooke for the infortunate fall, and death of his children, he ended his daies without issue: this title lay still, untill that King Edward the Sixth, conferred it upon William Powlet Lord Saint Iohn, See Basing in Hant-shire. whom soone after hee made Marquesse of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer of England, in whose family it remaineth at this day. This Countie containeth in it Parishes. 304. HANTSHIRE. N Ext to Wilshire is that Country which sometimes the Saxons called , and is now commonly named Hantshire: of which, one part that beareth farther within the land, be∣longed, no doubt, to the Belgae, the other which lieth upon the sea appertained, without question, to the Regni, an ancient peo∣ple of Britaine. On the West it hath Dorsetshire, and Wil∣shire, on the South the Ocean to bound it: on the East it joy∣neth to Sussex, and Surrie, and on the North it bordereth upon Barkshire. A small province it is, fruitfull in corne, furnished in some places with pleasant woods stan∣ding thicke, and well growne; rich in plenteous pasture, and for all commodities of sea most wealthy, and happie. It is thought that it was with the first brought un∣der subjection to the Romans. For, our Histories report, that Vespasian subdued it, and very probable reasons there are inducing us to beleeve the same. For, Dio witnesseth, that Plautius, and Vespasian, when they were sent by the Emperour Clau∣dius against the Britaines, did give the attempt upon this Island, with an armie divi∣ded into three parts, least if they should have ventured to land in one place onely they might have beene driven backe from the shore. Suetonius also writeth, that in this expedition Vespasian fought thirtie battailes with the enemie, and subdued the Isle of Wight which lieth against this country, and two other right puissant nations with it. For which his victories, as also for passing over the Ocean so safely. Valerius Flac∣cus speaketh unto Vespasian himselfe, as one more fortunate than Iulius Caesar, in this manner. Tu{que} O Pelagi cui major aperti Fama, Caledonius post quam tua Carbasa vexit Oceanus, Fhrigios prius indignatus Iülos. And thou for Seas discoverie whose fame did more appeare, Since that thy ships with sailes full spred in Northren Ocean were, Which skorn'd before, of Phrygian line the Julii to beare. And of the very same Vespasian, Appolonius Collatius Novariensis, the Poet versified thus: Ille quidem nuper faelici Marte Britannos Fuderat. He verily of late by happy flight. Had won the field, and Britains put to flight. But how in this war Titus delivered Vespasian his father, when he was very streight∣ly besieged by the Britans: and how at the same time likewise, an adder grasped him about, and yet never hurt him, (which he tooke as a lucky foretoken of his Em∣pire) you may learne out of Dio and Forcatulus. I, for my part, (to come to my pur∣pose) beginning at the West side of this province will make my perambulation along the sea-coast, and the rivers that runne into the Ocean, and after that survey the more in-land parts thereof. Hard by the Westerne bounds the river Avon carrieth a still streame, and no sooner runneth into this shire, but it meeteth with the foard of Cerdicus, in old time Cer∣dicks-foard, Cerdici vadum Cerdicks ford. afterward Cerdefoard, and now by contraction of the word, Chardfoard, so named of Cerdic that Warlike English-Saxon. For, heere the said Cerdic in a set battaile so daunted the Britaines, 5091. that not onely he enlarged the bounds of his Em∣pire, but also delivered an easie warre unto his posteritie: having before time in the yeare of our Salvation 508. after great conflicts in this tract, vanquished the most mightie King of the Britaines, Natanleod, called also Nazaleod by others, with many of his people. Natanleod or Nazaleod. Of whose name likewise, a small region reaching unto this place was HAMSHIRE OLIM PARS BELGARVM termed Natanleod, as we reade in the Annales of the English Saxons: which I sought very curiously for, but hitherto could not find so much as any small signe or sample of that name: Whether Natanleod and Aurelius Ambrose be the same. neither can I guesse who that Natanleod should be. But most certaine it is, that Aurelius Ambrose, at the very same time skirmished otherwhiles with the Saxons in this tract with alternative fortune: and those Chronicles of the English Saxons no where made mention of him; as who, (a thing that I have observed) being overmuch affectionate to themselves, reported onely their owne fortunate battailes, and victories, but never made words of their foiles and overthrowes. From thence the said river runneth on by Regnewood or Ringwood, called in the Domesday booke of England Rincewood. Which, that it was the same REGNVM, the chiefe towne of the Regni whereof Antoninus maketh mention, the account of the distance from other places, the remaines of the name and the very signification thereof doe plaine∣ly prove. For, Ring-wed by that Saxon addition seemeth to signifie the Wood of the Regni. A towne in ancient time of great fame, as may bee gathered by the Hundred adjoyning, which is named thereof: but now it is a well frequented mercate towne and no better: Aven being departed from hence, entertaineth the river Stoure com∣ming downe out of Dorset shire, where betweene the meeting of these two streames, there standeth a pretty towne of trade and well peopled. At this day of a Church there dedicated unto Christ, Christ-church named Christ-Church: but in old time Twinamburne, because it is scituate betweene the two rivers, right in the same sense that Interamna in Italie hath his name. It was fortified in times past with a Castle, and beautified with an ancient Church of Prebendaries, which being built in the Saxons time and after repaired by Raulph Flammard Bishop of Durham (who was Deane there) in the raigne of William Rufus, and by Richard de Ripariis Earle of Devonshire (whom King Henry the First enfeoffed in this place) endowed also with great rents and reve∣newes, continued in very great name untill the daies of King Henrie the Eighth, and that fatall and finall houre of the Monasteries of England, Under this towne Stoure and Aven joyning together doe emptie themselves into the sea at one mouth, which Ptolomee called the mouth of the River Alaun ; and rightly too: For I cannot re∣solve with my selfe to thinke, that that river properly was named Aven, considering this is a common name, and the Britaines by that terme, called all rivers. But I would take it, that some time it was called Alaun, because there remaine yet some re∣liques (as it were) of that name in the villages upon it, to wit, in Allington, Alling∣ham, &c. A long the East banke of this river in this Shire, King William of Normandie pul∣led downe all the townes, villages, houses, and Churches farre and neere, cast out the poore Inhabitants, and when he had so done brought all within thirty miles compasse or there about into a forrest and harbour for wild beasts, which the Englishmen in those daies termed Ytene, New forres and we now call New forrest. Of which Act of his, Gwalter Maps who lived immediately after, wrote thus. The Conquerour tooke away land both from God and men, to dedicate the same unto wild beasts, and Dogs-game: in which space he threw downe sixe and thirtie-Mother-Churches, and drave all the people thereto belonging quite away. And this did he, either that the Normans might have safer and more se∣cure arrivall in England, (for it lieth over against Normandie) in case after that all his wars were thought ended, any new dangerous tempest should arise in this Island a∣gainst him: or for the pleasure which he tooke in hunting: or else to scrape and rape money to himselfe by what meanes soever he could: For, being better affected and more favourable to beasts than to men, he imposed verie heavie fines and penalties, yea and other more grievous punishments, upon those that should meddle with his game. But Gods just judgement not long after followed this so unreasonable and cruell act of the King. For, Richard his second sonne, and William Rufus King of England, Elogium. another sonne of his, perished both in this Forrest: William by chance shot through with an arrow by Walter Tirell ; the other blasted with a pestilent aire. Hen∣rie likewise his Grand-child by Robert his eldest sonne, whiles hee hotely pursued his game in this Chase was hanged amongst the boughes and so died: that wee may learne thereby. How even childrens children beare the punishment of their Fathers sonnes. There goe commonly abroad certaine verses, that Iohn White Bishop of Win∣chester made of this Forrest: Which although they falsly make William Rufus to have ordained the same, yet because they are well liked of many, I am likewise well con∣tent heere to set them downe. Templa adimit Divis, fora civibus, arva colonis Rufus, & instituit Beaulensi in rure forestam: Rex cervum insequitur, Regem vindicta, Tirellus Non bene provisum transfixit acumine ferri. From God and Saint King Rus did Churches take, From Citizens town-court, and mercate place, From Farmer lands: New forrest for to make, In Beaulew tract, where whiles the King in chase Pursues the Hart, just vengeance comes apace, And King pursues. Tirrell him seeing not, Unawares him slew with dint of arrow shot. He calleth it Beauley tract, for that King Iohn built hard by, a pretty Monasterie, for the pleasant scituation called Beaulieu, which continued ever unto our Fathers me∣morie, of great fame as being an unviolated sanctuarie and a safe refuge for all that fled to it: in so much that in times past, our people heere thought it unlawfull, and an hainous offence by force to take from thence any persons whatsoever, were they thought never so wicked murtherers or traitours: so that our Ancestors when they e∣rected such Sanctuaries, or Temples (as they terme them) of Mercie, every where throughout England, seemed rather to have proposed unto themselves Romulus to imitate than Moses: Sanctuaries. Exod. 21. Iosephus, An∣tiquita. u lib. 4. who commanded that wilfull murtherers should bee plucked from the Altar and put to death: and for them onely appointed Sanctuarie, who by meere chance had killed any man. But least the sea coast, for so long a tract as that forrest is heere, should lie with∣out defence all open and exposed to the enemie, King Henrie the Eighth began to strengthen it with forts, for, in that foreland or promontorie shooting farre into the sea: From whence we have the shortest cut into the Isle of Wight. hee built Hurst Castle, Hurst Castle. which commandeth sea ward every way. And more toward the East hee set up also another fortresse or blockhouse, they name it Calshot Castle for Caldshore, to defend the entrie of Southhampton Haven, as more inwardly on the other are the two Castles of S. Andrew, and Netly. For, heere the shores retiring as it were them∣selves a great way backe into the land, and the Isle of Wight also; butting full upon it doe make a very good harbour, which Ptolomee calleth The mouth of the river Tri∣santon, (as I take it) for Traith Anton: that is, Anton Bay. For Ninnius an old writer giveth it almost the same name when he termeth it Trahannon mouth. As for the ri∣ver running into it, at this day is called Test, it was in the foregoing age (as wee reade in the Saints lives) named Terstan, and in old time Ant, or Anton: as the townes standing upon it, namely Ant port, Andover and Hanton in some sort doe testifie. So farre am I of (pardon me) from thinking that it tooke the name of one Hamon a Roman, (a name not used among Romans) who should be there slaine. And yet Gef∣frey of Monmouth telleth such a tale, and a Poet likewise his follower who pretily maketh these verses of Hamon. Ruit huc, illucque ruentem Occupat Arviragus, ejusque in margine ripae Amputat ense caput, nomen tenet inde perempti Hammonis Portus, longumque tenebit in aevum. Whiles Hamon rusheth here and there within the thickest ranke, Arviragus encountreth him, and on the rivers banke, With sword in hand strikes of his head: the place of him thus slaine, Thence forth is named Hamons-Haven, and long shall so remaine. South-Anton. But upon this Haven standeth South-hanpton, a little Citie, neeere unto which on the North-east, there flourished in old time another of that name: which may seeme to be Antonine his CLAVSENTVM, by the distance of it, as well on the one side from Ringwood, as from Venta on the other, And as Trisanton in the British language signifieth the Bay of Anton, so Glausentum in the same tongue, is as much as the Ha∣ven of Entum. For, I have heard, that Claudh among the Britans, is that which the Graecians call , that is, a forced Haven made by digging and casting up the earth. Now, that this place was called Hanton, and Henton, no man needs to doubt, seeing in that booke wherein King William the first made a survey of all Eng∣land, this whole shire is expressely named Hanscyre and in some places Hentscyre, and the very towne it selfe for the South scituation of it, South hanton ▪ What manner of towne that Clausentum was, it is hard to say: but seated it was in that place, where the field is which now they call S. Maries ; and reached even to the Haven: and may seeme also to have taken up the other banke or strand of the river: For, a lit∣tle above at Bittern over against it, Francis Mills a right honest gentleman there dwel∣ling, shewed unto me the rubbish, old broken walls, and trenches of an ancient castle, which carrieth halfe a mile in compasse, and at every tide is compassed for three parts of it with water a great breadth. The Romane Emperors ancient coines now and then there digged up, doe so evidently prove the antiquity thereof, that if it were not the Castle of old Clausentum, you would judge it to be one of those forts or fen∣ces which the Romans planted upon the South coast of the Ocean, to represse, as Gildas writeth, the piracies and depredations of the Saxons. When all became wasted, by the Danish warres, old Hanton also was left as a prey in the yeere of our Lord 980. to be sacked and rifled by them: and King William the Conqueror in his time had in it but fourescore men and no more in his demaine. But above 200. yeeres since when Edward the Third King of England and Philip Valois bustled for the very Kingdome of France, it was fired by the French and burnt to the gound. Out of the ashes whereof, presently sprung the towne which now is to be seene, but situate in a more commodious place betweene two rivers: for number of houses and those faire built much renowned, for rich Inhabitants & concourse of merchants wealthy: fenced round about with a double ditch, strong wals, and turrets standing thicke be∣tweene: and for defence of the Haven a right strong Castle it hath of square stone, upon a Mount cast up to a great height, built by King Richard the Second. And af∣terward King Henrie the Sixt granted to the Major, Balives and Burgesses that it should be a Countie by it selfe, with other liberties. Memorable is that of the most puissant Canutus King of England and of Denmarke, by which he in this place repres∣sed a flatterer who bare the King in hand that all things in the Realme were at his will and command. He commanded (saith Henrie of Huntingdon ) that his chaire should be set on the shore, when the sea began to flow. And then in the presence of many, said he to the sea as it flowed. Thou art part of my Dominion, and the ground on which I sit is mine, nei∣ther was there ever any that durst disobey my commandement and went away free and un∣punished. Wherefore, I charge thee, that thou come not upon my land, neither that thou wet the clothes or body of thy Lord. But the sea according to his usuall course flowing still, without any reverence of his person wet his feet. Then he retiring backe said. Let all the Inhabitants of the world know, that vaine and frivolous is the power of Kings, and that none is worthy the name of King, but hee, to whose command the heaven earth and sea by bond of an evelasting law are subject and obedient, and never after that time set hee the crowne upon his head, &c. Of those two rivers, betweene which this South anton standeth, that in the West now called Test, and in times past Anton, (as I suppose) springing out of the forrest of Chate, goeth first to Andover, which in the Saxon language is , that is, The passage or Ferry over And: where in the yeare of our salvation 893. Aetheldred King of England, when the Danes harried and spoiled his Kingdome on every side, to the end that hee might at length refresh and cherish his weakened and wearied countries with sure and quiet peace, inserted into his owne familie by way of adop∣tion Aulaf the Dane: which not withstanding soone after tooke small or none effect: For, this great honour done to the barbabrous Dane, could not reclaime and stay his minde, from rapine and spoyling still. From thence it runneth downe and receiveth from the East a brooke passing by Bullingdon, in whose parish is a place called Tibury hill, Tibury, some say for Titus∣bury. and containeth a square field by estimation of ten acres ditched about, in some places deeper than other, wherein hath beene found tokens of Wells, and about which the ploughmen have found squared stones, and Roman coines, as they report, for the place I have not seene. This brooke entreth into Test neere Worwhell, where Queene Aelfrith built a Monasterie to expiate and make satisfaction for that most foule and heinous fact, wherewith so wickedly she had charged her soule by making away King Edward her husbands son: as also to wash out the murthering of her for∣mer husband Aethelwold a most noble Earle, whom King Edgar trained forth hither a hunting, and then strake him through with a dart, because hee had deluded him in his love secrets, and by deceitfull and naughtie meanes prevented him and gotten for himself this same Aelfrith the most beautifull Lady that was in those daies. After this Test having taken into it a little river from Wallop, Wallop. or more truly Well-hop, that is, by interpretation out of our forefathers ancient language, A prety well in the side of an hill, whereof that right worshipfull familie of the Wallops of Knights degree dwelling hard by, Brige. tooke name: seeketh for BRIGE or BRAGE, an ancient towne likewise placed by Antonine nine miles from Sorbiodunum: at which distance betweene Salisburie and Winchester he findeth not farre from his banke, Broughton a small country towne: which if it were not that BRAGE, I verily believe it was then utterly destroyed when William of Normandie laid all even with the ground heere abouts to make that for∣rest, before mentioned. Rumsey. Then goeth this river to see Rumsey, in Saxon speech Rum- . A nunnery founded by King Edgar, the large Church whereof yet standeth; out of the which Mary daughter of King Stephen being there Abbesse, and his only heire surviving, was conveied secretly by Mathew of Alsace sonne to the Earle of Flan∣ders, and to him married. But after she had borne to him two daughters, was enfor∣ced by sentence of the Church to returne hither again according to her vow. Thence glideth this water straight into Anton Haven, at Arundinis Vadum, as Bede called it, and interpreteth it himselfe Reedeford: Redbridge. but now of the bridge where the foard was named, for Redeford, Sedbridge: where, at the first springing up of the English Saxon Church, there flourished a Monasterie, the Abbat whereof Cymbreth, as Bede wri∣teth, baptized the two brethren being very little ones of Arvandus the pettie King of Wight, even as they were ready to be put to death. For, when Cedwalla the Saxon set upon the Isle of Wight, these small children to save their lives fled to a little town called Ad lapidem, and hid themselves there, untill at length being betraied, they were at Cedwallaes commandement killed. If you aske mee, what this little towne Ad lapidem, Regesti. should bee, I would say it were Ston ham, a small village next to Rede∣bridge, which the very signification of the name may evidently prove for mee. The other river that runneth forth at the East-side of Southhampton, may seeme to have beene called Alre: For, the mercate towne standing upon the banke thereof, not farre from ponds out of which it issueth, is called Alres-ford, that is, The foard of Alre. This towne, (to use the words of an old Record of Winchester): Kinewalce the religious King instructed in the Sacraments of faith by the Bishop Birinus at the very beginning of Christian religion (in this tract,) with great devotion of heart gave unto the Church of God at Wenta. In the yeare of grace 1220. Godfrey Lucy Bishop of Win∣chester made a new market place heere, and called it Novum forum, that is, New mer∣cate, in regard haply of old Alres-ford adjoyning thereto. But this new aime conti∣nued not long with the people, who in the matter of speech carry the greatest stroke. Neere heereunto is Tichburne, which I must not omit, for that it hath given name to a worshipfull and ancient familie. Vpon the West banke of this river is scituate the most famous Citie of the British Belgians, called by Ptolomee and Antoninus Venta Belgarum, by the Britaines of Wales even at this day, Caer Gwent: by the Saxons in old time , in Latine commonly Wintonia, and by us in these daies of Winchester. Yet there bee some which affirme this to be Venta Simenorum, and do grace Bristow, with the name of Venta Belgarum. But that there were never any Simeni at all in this Island, I will prove when I come to the Iceni. In the meane season, though they should seeke all the townes that Antoninus placeth on every side in the way to, or from VENTA BEL∣GARVM, as narrowly as Emmots paths, yet shall they find nothing for their pur∣pose to make good this their assertion. The Etymologie of this name Venta, some fetch from Ventus, that is, Wind, others from Vinum, that is, Wine, and some againe from Wina a Bishop: who all of them be farre wide, and should doe well to pray for better judgement. Yet like I rather the opinion of Leland: who hath derived it from the British word Guin or Guen, that is, White, so that Caer Guin should signifie as much, as the White Citie. And why not? seing the old Latines named these their Cities, Alba longa, and Alba regia, of white∣nesse: yea, and the Grecians also had their Leuca, Leucas, and other nations also ma∣ny places taking name of whitenesse. For, this Venta, like as the other two of the same name, to wit, VENTA SILVRVM, and VENTA ICENORVM, are seated all three in a soile that standeth upon chalke, and a whitish clay. A Citie it was no doubt, flourishing even in the Romans times, as in which the Emperours of Rome seeme to have had their sacred of houses weaving and embroi∣dering peculiar to their owne persons, and uses: seeing among all the VENTAS in Britaine, it was both the chiefe, and also nearest unto Italie. For, in the booke of Notitiae, mention is made of the Procurator [Master or Governour] Cynegii VEN∣TENSIS or BENTENSIS, in Britaine: where the onely flowre of Lawyers, Iames Cujacius readeth Cynaecii, and in his Paratitles upon the Code interpreteth it, Sacrum textrinum, that is, The sacred workhouse or shop of embroidering and weaving. And right of his mind is Guidus Pancirolus, Cynacium▪ who writeth that those Gynaecia were instituted for the weaving of the Princes, and souldiers garments, of Ship-sailes, of linnen sheetes, or covering, and such like cloaths, necessarie for the furniture of mansions. But Wolfangus Lazius was of opinion, that that the Procurator aforesaid, had the charge heere of the Emperours dogs. And to say truth, of all the dogs in Europe, ours beare the name; British dogs▪ in so much, as Strabo witnesseth, our dogges served as souldiers, and the ancient Galles made speciall use of them even in their wars. And of all others, they were in most request both for those baitings in the Amphitheaters, and also in all other publique huntings among the Romans. For as the same Strabo writeth, they were , that is, of a generous kind and framed naturally for hunting. Whereupon Nemesianus wrote thus: divisa Britannia mittit Veloces, nostrique orbis venatibus aptos. Though Britaine from this world of ours doth lie secluded farre, Swift hounds it sends which for our game most fitly framed are. Gratius also, of their price and excellencie, saith thus: Quod freta si Morinûm dubi refluentia ponto Veneris, atque ipsos libeat penetrare Britannos, O quanta est merces, & quantum impendia supra? If that to Calice-streights you goe, Where tides uncertaine ebbe and flow. And list to venture further more, Crossing the seas to British shore: What meede would come to quite your paines: What overdeale beside, of gaines. Yea and that very dog with us, A Gase∣hound. which of the old name Agasaeus, we call yet at this day a Gasehound, those ancient Greekes both knew, and also had in great price. And this will Oppian in his first booke of his Cynegeticks tell you, Agasaeus, a British houn in these Greeke verses. , . , , . Which Bodine turned into Latine thes: Est etiam catuli species indagine clara, Corpus huic breve, magnifico sed corpore digna, Picta Britannorum gens illos effera bello Nutrit, Agasaeos{que} vocat, vilissima forma Corporis, ut credas parasitos esse latrantes. And may be Englished in this wise. Stout hounds there are, and those of finders kind, Of bodie small but doughtie for their deed: The painted folke, fierce Britans as we find, Them Gasehounds call, for they with them doe breed. In making, like house dogs, or at a word, To lickerous curs that craven at our bord. Claudian also, touching our Mastives writeth in this sort: Magna{que} taurorum fracturi colla Britanni. And British mastives downe that puls, Or breake the necks of sturdy bulls. I have too far digressed about dogges, yet hope a favourable pardon. In this Citie as our owne Historiographers doe report, in the time of the Romans, was that Constans the Monke, who by his father Constantine was first elect Caesar, and afterwards Augustus: that Constantine I say, who upon hope of this name had assumed the Imperiall purple roabe, that is, usurped the Empire against Honorius. For, long since, (as Zosinus recordeth speaking of those times) as well in villages as in Ci∣ties, there were great colledges peopled (as it were) with Monks, who before time ying the light lived scattering heere and there among mountaines, woods, and for∣rests all solitary by themselues, whereof also they were so called. Now, of this Col∣ledge wherein the said Constans was, those old broken walles which are seene of that thicknesse and strength, at the West-gate of the Cathedrall Church, may seeme to be the ruines and reliques. See before in the Empe∣rours. But this imperiall Monke taken out from hence suffered soone after condigne punishment, both for his fathers ambition and also for the con∣tempt of his professed religion. During the Heptarchie of the Saxons, this Citie albeit once or twice it suffered much calamity and miserie, yet it revived, and recove∣red againe: yea, and became the seat royall of the West-Saxons Kings, adorned with magnificent Churches, and a Bishops See: furnished likewise with six mint houses by King Aethelstane. In the Normans time also it flourished very much, and in it was erected an office for keeping of all publike records and evidences of the Realme. In which prosperous estate it continued a long time: but that once or twice it was defaced by misfortune of suddaine fires, and in the civill war betweene Stephen, and Maude about the Kingdome of England, lacked by the unruly and insolent souldiers. Whereupon Necham our countriman who lived in that age, writeth thus: Guintoniam titulis claram, gazisque repletam Noverunt veterum tempora prisca patrum. Sed tam sacra fames auri, jam caecus habendi, Vrbibus egregiis parcere nescit amor. Our ancestours knew Winchester sometimes a goodly Towne, In treasure rich and plentifull, in name of great renowne: But now, for hunger after gold our men so greedy are; That even such Cities excellent, they know not how to spare. But of these losses it recovered it selfe by the helpe of Edward the third, who heere appointed the Mart for wooll and cloth, which we commonly call the Staple. What was the face and outward shew of this Citie in these foregoing times, a man can hardly tell, considering that, as the said Necham writeth: —Flammis toties gens aliena dedit. Hinc facies urbis toties mutata, dolorem Praetendit, casus nuntia vera sui. So many times a nation strange Hath fir'd this towne, and made such change; That now her face and outward hue Her griefe bewray's, and tels full true. In these daies of ours it is indifferently well peopled and frequented, having water plentie, by reason of the River turned and conveighed divers waies into it, lying somewhat in length from East to West, and containeth about a mile and a halfe in circuit within the walls: which open at sixe gates, and have every one of them their suburbs reaching forth without, a good way. On the South side of the West gate there mounteth up an old Castle, which oftentimes hath beene besieged, but most sore and straightly, above the rest what time as Mawd the Empresse held it against King Stephen, and at length by a rumour given out that she was dead, and causing her selfe to be caried out in a coffin like a course deceived the enemie. As concerning that round table there, hanging up against the wall which the common sort useth to gaze upon with great admiration, The round Table. Torneaments. as if it had beene King Arthurs table, I have nothing to say but this, That, as a man which vieweth it well may easily perceive, it is no∣thing so ancient as King Arthur. For, in latter times when for the exercise of armes and feates of warlike prowesse, those runnings at tilt, and martiall justlings or tornea∣ments, were much practised: they used such tables, least any contention or offence for prioritie of place should through ambition arise among Nobles and Knights assem∣bled together. And this was a custome of great antiquitie, as it may seeme. For, the ancient Gaules, Dei p osophist, lib. 4. as Athenaeus writeth, were wont to sit about round tables, and their Esquires stood at their backes, holding their shields. About the midst of the citie, but more inclining to the South, Kenelwalch King of the West-Saxons after the subversion of that Colledge of Monkes which flourished in the Romans time, (as William of Malmesburie saith) First founded to the glory of God, Bishops of Winchester. the fairest Church that was in those daies; in which very place, the posteritie afterwards in building of a Cathedrall seate for the Bishop, although it were more stately than the first, yet followed just in the very same steps. In this See, there have sitten since Wina, whom the said Ke∣nelwalch ordained the first Bishop there, Many Bishops some renowned for their wealth and honourable port, and some for holinesse of life. But among other, Saint Swithin continueth yet of greatest fame, not so much for his sanctitie, as for the raine which usually falleth about the Feast of his translation in Iuly, by reason the Sunne then Cosmically with Praesepe and Aselli, noted by ancient writers to be rainie con∣stellations, and not for his weeping, or other weeping Saints Margaret the Virgine, and Mary Magdalen, whose feasts are shortly after, as some superstitiously-credulous have believed. This by the way, pardon me I pray you, for I digresse licentiously. Thus Bishops of Winchester have beene anciently by a certaine peculiar preroga∣tive that they have, Chancellours to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and for long time now Prelates to the order of the Garter: and they have from time to time to their great cost reedified the Church, and by name, Edington and Walkelin, but Wick∣ham especially: who built all the West part thereof downe from the quire, after a new kind of worke, I assure you, most sumptuously. In the midst of which building is to be seene his owne tombe of decent modestie betweene two pillars. And these Bishops have ever and anon consecrated it to new Patrons and Saints, as to Saint Amphibalus, Saint Peter, Saint Swithin, and last of all to the holy Trinitie: by which name it is knowne at this day. The English Saxons also, had this Church in great honour for the sepulture of certaine Saints and Kings there, (whose bones Richard Fox the Bishop gathered, and shrining them in certaine little gilded coffers placed them orderly with their severall Inscriptions in the top of that wall which en∣closeth the upper part of the quire) and they called it in times past , that is, The old Minster, for difference from another more lately built, which was named , William Malmesburie. that is, The new Minster ; which Elfred founded; and for the building of houses of office belonging to the same purchase of the Bishop a plot of ground; and for every foot of it paid him downe a marke after the publike weight. This monasterie as also that other the older, was built for married Priests, who af∣terwards, upon I know not what miracle of a Crosse that spoke, and disliked their marriage, were thrust out by Dunstane Archbishop of Canterbury, and Monkes put in their place. The walls of these two monasteries stood so neere and close together, that the voices of those that sung in the one troubled the chaunting of the other: whereupon there arose grudge and heart-burning betweene these Monkes, which af∣terwards brake out into open enmities: By occasion whereof, and because at this new monasterie there gathered and stood much water which from the Westerne gate came downe thither along the current of the streets, and cast forth from it an unwholsome aire, the Minster Church two hundred yeares after the first foundation of it, was removed into the Suburbs of the citie on the North part, which they call Hide. Hide Abbey. Where, by the permission of King Henry the First, the Monks built a most stately and beautifull monasterie; which a few yeares after by the craftie practice of Henrie de Blois Bishoppe of Winchester (as the private historie of this place witnesseth) was pitiously burnt. In which fire, that Crosse also was con∣sumed, which Canutus the Dane gave, and upon which, as old writings beare re∣cord, he bestowed as much as his owne yeares revenewes of all England came unto. The monasterie neverthelesse was raised up againe, and grew by little and little to wonderfull greatnesse, as the very ruines thereof even at this day doe shew, untill that generall subversion, and finall period of our monasteries. For then, was this mo∣nasterie demolished: and into that other of the holy Trinitie, which is the Cathe∣drall Church, when the monkes were thrust out were brought in their stead, a Deane, twelve Prebendaries, and there placed. At the East side of this Cathedrall Church, standeth the Bishops palace, called Wolvesey: a right goodly thing, and sumptuous; which being towred and compassed almost round with the streame of a prety river, reacheth even to the Citie walls: Wickham Colledge. and in the South-suburbes, just over against it be∣holdeth a faire Colledge: which William Wickham Bishop of this See, the greatest father and Patron (of all Englishmen) of good literature, William Wickham. and whose praise for ever to the worlds end will continue, built for a Schoole, and thereto dedicated it: out of which, both for Church and Common-wealth there riseth a most plentiful increase of right learned men. For, in this Colledge, one warden, ten fellowes, two Schoole-masters, and threescore and ten schollers, with divers others are plentifully main∣tained. There have beene also in this Citie, Saint Mary Abbey. other faire and goodly buildings, (for very many were here consecrated to religion) which I list not now to recount, since time and avarice hath made an end of them. Onely, that Nunnery, or monasterie of vailed Virgins, which Elfwida, the wife of King Elfred founded, I will not overpasse: seeing it was a most famous thing as the remainder of it now doth shew: Matildis Mawde wife to King Henry the first. and for that, out of it King Henrie the First tooke to wife Mawde the daughter of Malcolne King of Scots, by whom the Royall bloud of the ancient Kings of England became united to the Normans, and he therefore wonne much love of the English nation. For, nei∣phew shee was in the second degree of descent, unto Edmund Iron-side, by his sonne Edward the Banished. A woman, as adorned with all other vertues meet for a Queene, so especially inflamed with an incredible love of true pietie and godlinesse. Where∣upon was this Tetrastich made in her commendation: Prospera non laetam fecêre, nec asperae tristem: Aspera risus ei, prospera terror erant. Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam, Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens. No prosp'rous state did make her glad, Nor adverse chances made her sad: If fortune frown'd, she then did smile; If fortune frown'd, she feard the while. If beauty tempted, she yet said nay, No pride she tooke in scepters sway: Shee onely high, her selfe debas'd, A lady onely faire and chast. Concerning Sir Guy of Warwick, of whom there goe so many prety tales, who in single fight overcame here that Danish giant and Golias, Colbrand: and of Waltheof Earle of Huntingdon, that was here beheaded, where afterwards stood Saint Giles chappell: as also of that excellent Hospital of Saint Crosse there adjoyning, founded by Henry of Blois bother to King Stephen, and Bishop of this City, and augmented by Henry Beauford Cardinall, I need not to speake: seeing every man may read of them in the common Chronicles. As touching the Earles of Winchester, to say nothing of Earles of Winchester. Clyto the Saxon whom the Normans deprived of his ancient honour King Iohn created Saier Quincy, Earle of Winchester, who used for his armes a military belt, they call it a Fesse, with a labell of seven as I have seene upon his seales. After him succeeded Roger his sonne, who bare, Gules, seven Mascles voided, Or: but with him that honour vanished and went away, seeing he died without issue male. For, he married the eldest daughter and one of the coheires of Alan Lord of Galloway in Scotland by a former wife, in right of whom he was Constable of Scotland. He had by her three onely daughters, the first married to William de Ferrariis Earle of Derbie, the second to Alan de la Zouch, the third to Comine Earle of Bucqhanan in Scotland. A long time after Hugh le Dispencer, having that title bestowed upon him for terme of his life, by King Ed∣ward the second, whose minion he was, and only beloved, felt together with his sonne what is the consequence of Princes extraordinary favours: For both of them envied by most, were by the furious rage of the people put cruelly to shamefull death. And long it was after this, that through the bounty of King Edward the Fourth, Lewis of Bruges Pr. p. Pat. Anno 12. E. 4. a Netherland Lord of Gruthuse, Prince of Steinhuse, &c. Who had given him comfort and succour in the Netherlands, when hee was fled his native countrey, received this honour with Armes resembling those of Roger Quincy, in these words, Azur a dix Mascles D'or en orm d'un Canton de nostie propre Armes d' Engleterre, cest∣savour, de Goul un Leopard passant d' or, armeè d' azur. All which, after King Edwards death, he yeilded up into the hands of Henrie the seventh. But lately within our memorie King Edward the sixth, honoured Sir William Pawlet Lord Treasurer of England, Earle of Wilshire, and Lord Saint Iohn of Basing, with a new title of Marquesse of Winchester. A man prudently pliable to times, raised not sodainely but by degrees in Court, excessive in vaste informous buildings; temperate in all other things, full of yeares, for he lived nintie seven years, and fruitfull in his generation, for he saw one hundred and three, issued from him by Elizabeth his wife, daughter to Sir William Capell Knight. And now his grand-child William enjoyeth the said honours: For the Geographicall position of Winchester, it hath beene observed by former ages to be in longitude two and twenty degrees, and in latitude fiftie one. From Winchester more Eastward the river Hamble at a great mouth emptieth it selfe into the Ocean. Hamble. Solente frith. Beda calleth it Homelea, which, as he writeth, by the lands of the Intae entreth into Solente: for so termeth he that frith our narrow sea, that runneth be∣tweene the Isle of Wight and the main land of Britain▪ in which the tides at set houres rushing in with great violence out of the Ocean at both ends, and so meeting one another in the midst, seemed so strange a matter to our men in old time, that they rec∣koned it among the wonders of Britaine. Whereof, read heere the very words of Beda. The two tides of the Ocean which about Britaine breake out of the vast Northern O∣cean daily encounter and fight one against another, beyond the mouth of the river Homelea: and when they have ended their conflict, returne backe, from whence they came and runne into the Ocean. Into this Frith that little river also sheadeth it selfe, which having his head neere Warnford, passeth betweene the Forrests of Waltham (where the Bishop of Winchester hath a goodly house), and of Bere, whereby is Wickham a mansion of that ancient family of Vuedal, and then by Tichfield, sometime a little monasterie founded by Petre de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester Roche. where the mar∣riage was solemnized betweene King Henry the sixth, and Margaret of Anjou ; and now the principall seate of the Lord Writheosleies Earles of South-hampton. From thence forthwith, the shore with curving crookes draweth it selfe in, and the Island named Portesey maketh a great creeke, Portsey. within the more inward nooke or corner whereof sometimes flourished Port peris ; (where, by report Vespasian landed) An haven towne which our Ancestours by a new name called Port-chester, not of Porto the Saxon, but of the port or haven. For, Ptolomee tearmeth it , that is, THE GREAT HAVEN, Portus Mag∣nus. for the widenesse of it, like as that Portus Magnus also in Africk, as Plinie witnesseth. And verily there remaineth yet a great Castle which hath a faire and spacious prospect into the haven underneath. But when as the Ocean by with-drawing it selfe, tooke away, by little and little the commoditie of the ha∣ven, the Inhabitants flitted from thence into the Island Portsey adjoyning, which ta∣keth in circuit much about fourteene miles, being at every full sea floated round a∣bout with salt-waters, out of which they boile salt, and by a bridge that hath a for∣tresse adjoyning unto it, is united to the Continent. This Island Athelflede King Eadgars wife had given to the New monasterie of Winchester. And in it at the very gullet, or mouth where the sea entreth in, our fore-fathers built a towne, and thereupon named it Portsmouth, Portesmouth. that is, the mouth of the haven. A place alwaies in time of warre well frequented, otherwise little resort there is to it: as beeing more favourable, and better affected to Mars and Neptune, than to Mercurie, that is, to warre rather than to traffique. A Church it hath of the old building, and an Hospitall ( Gods house they call it ) founded by Peter de Roch. Rupibus, Bishop of Winchester. For∣tified it was with a wall made of timber and the same well covered over with thicke bankes of earth: fenced with a platforme also or mount of earth in times past on the North-east, nere to the gate: and two block-houses at the entry of the haven made of new hewen stone: Which being by King Edward the fourth begunne, King Henrie the seventh as the Inhabitants report, did finish, and strengthned the towne with a garrison. But in our remembrance, Queene ELIZABETH at her great cost and charges so armed it (as one would say) with new fortifications, as that now there is nothing wanting, that a man would require in a most strong and fenced place. And of the garrison-souldiers some keepe watch and ward both night and day at the gates: others upon the towre of the Church, who by the ringing or sound of a bell give warning how many horse or foote are comming, and by putting forth a banner shew from what quarter they come. From hence as the shore fetcheth a compasse and windeth from Portes-bridge, wee had the sight of Havant a little mercate towne, and hard by it, of Wablington, a goodly faire house belonging some-times to the Earles of Salisbury; but now to the family of the Cottons Knights. Before which, there lie two Islands, the one greater, named Haling, the other lesse, called Thorney, of thornes there growing: and both of them have their severall parish Church. In many places along this shore, of the sea-waters flowing up thither, is made salt of a palish or greene colour: the which by a certaine artificious devise, they boyle untill it bee exceeding white. And of this sea, British salt. or Bay-salt, and not of ours made out of salt springs, is Saint Ambrose to bee understood, when hee writeth thus; Consider we those things which are usuall with many very grace-full: Hexameron. lib. 5. cap. 11. namely, how water is turned into salt, of such hard∣nesse and soliditie, that often-times it is hewed with axes. This in the salts of Bri∣taine is no wonder, as which carrying a shew of strong marble, doe shine and glitter a∣gaine with the whitenesse of the same mettall, like unto snow, and bee holesome to the bodie, &c. Farther within the land, the MEANVARI dwelt, whose countrey togither with the Isle of Wight Edilwalch King of the South Saxons received in token of Adoption from Wlpher King of Mercians, Meanvari Bede lib. 4. cap. 13. Godfather unto him at the Font, when he was bapti∣zed. The habitations of these Meanvari, scarce changing the name, at this day is di∣vided into three hundreds; to wit, Means-borow, East-mean, and West-mean: and a∣mongst them there mounteth up an high Hill, environed in the top with a large rampier, and they call it old Winchester: at which, by report, there stood in old time a citie, Warnford. Adae hic Portu benedicat Solis ab Ortu Gens Deo dicata, per quem sic sum renovata. but now neither top nor toe, as they say, remaineth of it: so as a man would quickly judge it to have beene a summer standing campe, and nothing else. Under this is Warnford seated where Adam de Portu a mightie man, in this tract and of great wealth in the raigne of William the first, reedified the Church a new, as a couple of rude verses set fast upon the wall doe plainly shew. Upon these, more high into the land, Let Church∣men and reli∣gious folke, from time that Sun doth rise, Blesse Adam Port, by whom I am rebuil∣ded in this wise. those SEGONTIACI, who yeilded themselves unto Iulius Caesar, had their seate toward the North limite of this shire, in and about the hundred of Holeshot: wherein are to bee seene Mercate Aultim, which King Elfred bequeathed by his will unto the keeper of Leodre: also Basingstoke a mercate towne well frequented: upon the descent of an hill, on the North side whereof standeth solitarie a very faire Chappell consecrated unto the holy Ghost by William, the first Lord Sands, who was buried there. In the arched and embowed roofe whereof is to be seene the holy history of the Bible painted most artificially, Segontiaci. Basingstoke. with lively portraicts, and images repre∣senting the Prophets, the Apostles, and the Disciples of Christ. Beneath this, East∣ward lieth Basing, Basing Saint Iohn. a towne very well knowne, by reason of the Lords bearing the name of it, to wit, Saint Iohn, the Poinings, and the Powlets. For, when Adam de Por∣tu, Lord of Basing matched in marriage with the daughter and heire of Roger de Au∣revall, whose wife was likewise daughter and heire to the right noble house of Saint Iohn, William his sonne, to doe honour unto that familie assumed to him the surname of Saint Iohn, and they who lineally descended from him have still retained the same. But when Edmund Saint Iohn departed out of this world with∣out issue in King Edward the third his time, Out of an old Missall of the Family of Powlet. his sister Margaret, bettered the state of her husband Iohn, Saint Philibert, with the possessions of the Lord Saint Iohn: And when she was dead without children, Isabell the other sister wife unto Sir Luke Poinings, bare unto him Thomas, Lord of Basing, whose Neice Constance by his sonne Hugh, (unto whom this fell for her childs part of Inheritance) was wed∣ded into the familie of the Powlets, and she was great Grandmother to that Sir Wil∣liam Powlet who being made Baron Saint Iohn of Basing by King Henrie the Eighth, and created by King Edward the Sixth first Earle of Wilshire, and afterward Mar∣quesse of Winchester, and withall was Lord Treasurer of England, having in a trou∣blesome time runne through the highest honours, fulfilled the course of nature with the satietie of this life, and that in great prosperitie, as a rare blessing among Courtiers) after he had built a most sumptuous house heere, for the spacious large∣nesse thereof admirable to the beholders, untill for the great and chargeable reparations his successors pulled downe a good part of it. But of him I have spoken before. Neere unto this house, Vines in Bri∣taine. Vopiscus. the Vine sheweth it selfe, a very faire place, and Mansion house of the Baron Sands, so named of the vines there, which wee have had in Bri∣taine, since Probus the Emperours time, rather for shade than fruit. For, hee per∣mitted the Britaines and others to have vines. The first of these Barons was Sir Wil∣liam Sands, Barons Sands. whom King Henrie the Eighth advanced to that dignitie, being Lord Chamberlaine unto him, and having much amended his estate by marrying Margerie Bray, daughter and heire of Iohn Bray, and cousin to Sir Reinold Bray, a most worthy Knight of the Order of the Garter, and a right noble Baneret: whose Sonne Thomas Lord Sands, was Grandfather to William L. Sands that now liveth. Neighbouring hereunto is Odiam glorious in these daies for the Kings house there: Odiam. and famous for that David the Second King of Scots, was there imprisoned: a Burrough corporate, belonging in times past to the Bishop of Winchester: the fortresse whereof in the name of King John, Matthew Paris. thirteene Englishmen for fifteene daies defended most valiantly, and made good against Lewis of France, who with his whole armie besieged and as∣ted it very hotly. A little above, among these Segontiaci, toward the North side of the countrey, som∣times stood VINDONVM, Vindonum. the chiefe citie of the Segontiaci, which casting off his owne name, hath taken the name of the Nation, like as Luteria hath assumed unto it the name of the Parisians there inhabiting: for, called it was by the Britaines Caer Segonte, that is to say, Silcester. the Citie of the Segontiaci. And so Ninnius in his catalogue of cities named it: wee at this day called it Silecester: and Higden seemeth to clepe it of the Britaines Britenden: that this was the ancient Vindonum, I am induced to thinke by reason of the distance of Vindonum in Antoninus, from Gallena, or Guallenford, and Venta or Winchester: and the rather, because betweene this Vindonum and Venta, there is still to bee seene a causey, or street-way. Ninnius recordeth, that it was built by Constantius the sonne of Constantine the Great, and called sometime Murimintum, haply, for Muri-vindum, that is, the wals of Vindon. For, this word Mur borrowed from the provinciall language, the Britaines retained still, and V. the consonant, they change oftentimes in their speech, and writing into M. And to use the verie words of Asinnius, though they seeme ridiculous, the said Constantius, sowed upon the soile of this citie three seedes, that none should be poore that dwelt therein at any time. Like as Dinocrates, when Alexandria in Egypt was a building, strewed it with meale or flower (as Marcellinus writeth) all the circular lines of the draught, which being done by chance, was taken for a fore-token, that the citie should abound with al manner of victualls. He reporteth also, that Constantius died here, and that his Sepulchre was to be seene at one of the gates, as the Inscription sheweth. But in these matters let Ninnius cleere his owne credit; for, stuffed hee hath that little booke with many a pretty lie. Yet this I may be bold to affirme, that it flourished in great honour about that time: and I my selfe have lighted here upon very many peeces, of the coine of Constantine, the younger sonne to Constantine the Great: which in their reverse have the portraict of an house with this Inscription PROVIDENTIA CAES. Now that this Constantius whom he maketh the builder of this Citie, died at Mopsuestia in Cilicia, Sepulchres of honour. and was interred in Constantinople in the Sepulchre of his Ancestors, it is knowne for certaine, and confessed. Yet I will not denie, but that hee might have in this citie a monument erected in honour and remembrance of him. For, many there were that had such monuments built, about which the souldiers, were wont yearely to just, and keepe solemne turneaments in honour of the dead. When the declining Roman Empire hastened to an end, and barbarous nations began every where to waste and spoile the Provinces: their Armies heere in Britaine, fearing least the flame of this fire, wherewith their next neighbours in France were consumed, would catch hold of them, set up and created Emperours to themselves: first Marcus, then Gratian, whom they soone slew: and last of all in the yeare after Christs birth 407, Constantine Emperour, chosen in hope of his name. our Constantine for his names sake, they forced, wild he, nild he, to usurpe the Empire, and to put on the Imperiall Purple robe in the citie Caer Segont, as both Ninnius, and Gervase of Canterburie, do witnesse. This Constantine putting to sea out of Britaine, landed at Bononia. Bologne in France, and drew all the Roman armies even as farre as the Alpes to side and joyne with him in his warres. Hee stoutly de∣fended Valentia in France, against the power of Honorius the Emperour: the River Rhene which long before had beene neglected, hee fortified with a garrison. Upon the Alpes, where any passage was, hee built fortresses. In Spaine, under the con∣duct of his sonne Constans, whom of a Monke he had declared Emperour, he warred fortunately: and afterwards having sent his letters unto Honorius, and craved par∣don for suffering the souldiers, to put upon him the purple perforce, whether hee would or no; he accepted at his hands the Imperiall investure, which hee freely gave him. Whereupon being puffed up with pride, after hee had passed the Alpes, his mind was wholly set upon a journey to Rome. But hearing that Alaricus the Gothe who had favoured his part was dead, hee returned to Arles, where hee setled his Im∣periall seat, caused the Citie to bee called Constantina, and commanded the courts and assemblies of seven Provinces, there to bee holden. In the meane time Geron∣tius excited the souldiers against their Lord, and when he had treacherously slaine his sonne Constans at Vienna in France, besieged Constantine also himselfe within Arles. But after that one Constantius sent by Honorius with a great armie, made head against him, Gerontius killed himselfe. And Constantine being now streit∣ly besieged, and by reason of the unhappie successe of his men past all hope, laid a∣side the Purple and his great estate entred into the Church, became a Priest: and straight-waies when Arles was yeilded up, and hee carried into Italie, was himselfe, together with his sonne Julian (unto whom he had given the title of Heire appa∣rant. Iulianus Nobi∣lissimus. Nobilissimus ) and his brother Sebastian, beheaded. Thus much briefly of these occurrents, (which before are discoursed more at large) out of Zosimus, Zosomenus, Nicephorus, Oro∣sius, and Olympiodorus, to the end that Veritie may triumph over their vanitie, who have besprinkled this story with most ridiculous and foolish lies of their owne devising. Moreover, in this citie (our Historiographers write) that our warlike Arthur was invested and crowned King. But not long after it was razed quite, either in the Sax∣ons warres, or when Adelwolph being offended with his brother King Edward, upon a malicious mind, together with the helpe of the Danish Rovers, wasted this coun∣trey even to Basing-stoke. And now remaineth nothing save the wals, which although they want their battlements, Curtaine, and coppe, yet they seeme to have beene of a very great height. For, the earth is so growne up with the rubble, that I could scarce with stouping low passe through an old posterne, which they call, Onions Hole. These walles in some sort continue whole, but that they be broken through in those places where the gates were: and out of the very walles, I saw grow oakes of that bignesse, and those seeming (as it were) bredde with the very stones, with such huge roots clasping one another a great way, and spreading forth so mightie armes and boughes all abroad, that it would make the beholders to wonder thereat. These walles take in compasse about two Italian miles. Whereupon haply the Saxons cal∣led this citie Selcester, Sel, what it is. as one would say, The great Citie: for Sel may seeme to sound with them as much as Great, seeing Asserius hath interpreted the Saxon word, Sel∣wood, The Great wood. And before the walles Westward, where is a plaine, there li∣eth a banke of a great length, raised and cast up for a defence and fortification. The scite of this old citie, containeth about fourescore acres of ground within, which be∣ing a soile ploughed up an tilled, Armes of the Blewets, Bai∣nards, and Cusantes. are divided into corne-fields; with a little grove in the West-side: but on the East, neere unto the gappe in the wall, there standeth a Farme-house, and a pretty Church more lately built, in which, while I searched for ancient inscriptions, I found nothing, but onely in the windowes certaine armes, to wit, In a field sable, seven Fusils argent in Bend, likewise in a shield sables, a Fesse between two Cheverns, and in an Escutcheon Or, an Eagle displaied with two heads, gules. This last, I have heard say, was the coat of the Blewets, unto whom this land came, about the Conquerours time. The second belonged unto the ancient house of the Bainards of Leckham: but the first to the Cusanz, by whom from the Blewets it descended hereditarily, to the said Bainards. But in the raigne of William the Conquerour, it was the possession of William de Ow, a Norman, who being accused of high trea∣son, and desirous to prove his innocencie by combat, was overcome in fight, and by commandement of King William Rufus, had his two eies pluckt out of his head, and lost both his genetals. This is found by continuall observation (as I have learned of the Inhabitants of this place) that although the ground bee fertile and fruitfull enough, yet in certaine places crossing one another, the corne doth not thrive so well, but commeth up much thinner then else where, by which they suppose the streets of the citie went in old time. There are heere daily digged up, bricks such as wee call Britaine-bricks, and great store of Roman coine which they terme Onions pennies. For, they dreame that this Onion was a Giant, and dwelt in this citie. There are dig∣ged up also many times inscriptions, of which the unskilfull rurall people envie us the having. Onely one was brought from hence to London, which was to be seene in the gardens of the right honourable Sir William Cecill, Lord Burghley, and high Treasurer of England, to wit: MEMORIAE FL. VICTORI∣NAE. T. TAM: VICTOR CONJUX POSVIT. That this Tombe was erected for that Victorina which was called Mater Castrorum, that is, The mother of the Campe, and who against Gallienus the Emperour, excited in Gaule, and Britaine, the two Victorini, her sonne, and sonnes sonne, Posthumus like∣wise, Lollianus, Marius, and Tetricus, Caesars, I would not with others affirme. Yet I have read, that two of the VICTORS, were in some place here in Britaine, and those at one and the selfe-same time, the one Maximus the Emperour his soone, the other Praefectus Praetorio to the same Emperour, of whom Saint Ambrose maketh mention in his Epistles, but I dare avouch, that neither of these twaine reared this monument for his wife. As one high way or street of the Romans went straight from hence Southward to Winchester, so there was another ran west-ward through Pamber Forrest, very full of trees, and other by-places now standing out of the way, hard by Litchfield, that is, the field of dead bodies, to the Forrest of Chute pleasant for coole shade of trees, & plen∣tifull game: in which the Hunters and Forresters themselves do wonder at the banke or ridge thereof, so evident to be seene, paved with stone, but broken here and there. Kings-cleare. More toward the North, in the very edge and frontier of this Shire, we saw Kings-Cleare, a market towne in these daies well frequented, the residence in times past of the Saxon Kings, by it Fremantle in a parke where King Iohn much haunted, also Sidmanton, Sidmanton. the habitation of the Kingsmils, Knights: and Burgh-Cleare scituate under an high hill, in the top whereof a warlike rampire (such as our countreymen called a Burgh ) hath a trench taking a great compasse about it: from whence, there being a faire and open prospect every way ever the countrey lying underneath, there standeth a Specula. Beacon, that by light burning fire the enemies comming, may bee shewed to all the neighbour-Inhabitants round about. And verily such watches or signals as this, we terme in common speech Beacons, Beacon. of the old word Beacnian, that is, to shew by a signe, and for these many hundred yeares, they have beene in right great request, and much used among us: in some places, by heaping up a deale of wood, in others by barrels full of pitch fastened to the top of a mast or pole in the highest places of the countrey, at which, by night some doe evermore watch: and in old time, there were set horsemen as posts in many places, whom our Ancestors called Hobelers, who in the day time should give notice of the enemies approach. This shire, like as the rest which hitherto we have run over, belonged to the west-Saxon Kings: and when they had deposed Sigebert from his Kingdome, for his tyran∣nie, evill entreating and lewd managing of his province, this countrey, as Marianus writeth, was assigned unto him, least hee should seeme altogether a private person. Whom notwithstanding afterward, for his wicked deeds, they likewise expelled from hence: and so far was it off, that this afflicted state of a King moved any man to take pitie of him, that a Swine-heard in the end, slew him in the wood Anderida, where he had lurked, and hidden himselfe. This Shire can reckon but very few Earles, besides those of Winchester which I have already named. In the first time of the Normans, Bogo or Beavose the English man, who fought against the Normans in the battell at Cardiff in Wales, is reputed to have beene Earle of South-hampton, a man for warlike prowesse much renowned, whom while the Monks laboured to set out with their fained fables, they have ob∣scured his doughtie deeds in greater darkenesse. From which time unto the daies of K. Henry the Eight, there was no Earle of South-hampton that I read of: but he created William Fitz-williams descended from the daughter of Marquesse Montacute, both Earle of South-hampton, and also Admirall of England, when he was now well stric∣ken in yeares. Who dying straight after without issue; King Edward the Sixth, in the first yeare of his raigne conferred the said honour upon Thomas Wriotheosley Lord Chancellor, whose grand-child Henrie by his sonne Henrie, enjoyeth the same at this day: and in the prime and flowre of his age hath by good literature and militarie ex∣perience strengthned his honorable parentage, that in riper yeares he might be more serviceable to his Prince and countrey. There be found in this shire Parishes 253. and mercate townes 18. VECTA INSVLA ISLE OF WIGHT. T O this Countie of South-hampton belongeth that Island which lieth out in length over against the midst of it South-ward, cal∣led by the Romans in times past VECTA, VECTIS, and VIC∣TESIS, by Ptolomee , by Britaines Guith, by English-Saxons , and ; (For, an Island they termed ) and by us in these daies, the Isle of Wight and the Whight; by so small a streight running betweene, anciently cal∣led Solent. It is severed from the maine land, that it may seeme to have beene con∣joyned to it: whereof that British name of it Guith, which betokeneth a separation; as Ninnius saith, is thought to have beene given: even as Sicilie also being broken off (as it were) and cut from Italie got the name from Secando the Latin word (which signifieth cutting) as the right learned Iulius Scaliger is of opinion. Whereupon, (under correction alwaies of the Iudicious Criticks) I would read in the sixt Quest. Naturall. of Seneca, thus; Ab Italia Siciliaresecta, that is, Sicilie cut from Italie: wheras it is commonly read there, rejecta. By this Vicinitie of Scite, & Affinitie of name, we may well thinke, this Vecta to be that Icta, which as Diodorus Siculus writeth, see∣med at every tide to be an Island, but when it was ebbe, the ancient Britaines were wont that way to carry tinne thither by carts, which should bee transported into France. But yet I would not deeme it to be that MICTIS in Plinie, which likewise commeth very neere unto VECTA: For that in it there was plentie of tinne, but in this of ours there is not to my knowledge any veine at all of mettall. This Isle, betweene East and West in ovall forme, stretcheth out twentie miles in length: and spreadeth in the midst, where it is broadest twelve miles: having the one side turning to the North, and the other Southward. The ground (to say no∣thing of the sea exceeding full of fish) consisteth of soile very fruitfull, and is thanke∣full to the husbandman, in so much as it doth affoord corne to be carried forth: bree∣ding every where store of conies, hares, partridges and phesants. One little forrest it hath likewise, and two parkes replenished with deere, for game and hunting plea∣sure. Through the midst thereof runs a long tract or chaine of hils, yeilding plentie of pasture, and forrage for sheepe. The wool of which, next unto that of Lemster and Coteswold, is estemed best, and in speciall request with Clothiers, whereby there groweth to the Inhabitants much gaine and profit: The North part is all over greene with meddows, pastures, and woods: the South side lieth wholly in manner, bedecked with cornefields enclosed, where at each end the sea on the North-side doth so inbosome, encroach within it selfe, that it maketh almost two Islands: and verily so the Islanders call them: namely, Fresh-water Isle which looketh West, and Binbrige Isle, Eastward. In Bedas daies it was counted to containe a thousand and two hundred Hides: now it reckoneth upon 36. townes, villages and Castles: which for Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction belong to the Bishop of Winchester, and for civill govern∣ment, to the County of South-hanton. The Inhabitants of this Isle were wont mer∣rily to make their boast, that their case was happier than all others, because they had neither hooded monks, nor cavilling Lawyers, nor yet crafty foxes. Newport. The places of greater name be these, Newport, the principall mercate towne of the whole Isle, called in times past Medena, and Novus Burgus de Meden, that is, The new Burgh of Meden: whereof the whole country is divided into East Meden, and West Meden, an ordering as to their scituation East or West either way. Cacres-brooke an old Castle, so clepid and clipped short for White garesburg, is in the very heart and midst of the Isle, taking the name of Whitgar the Saxon, of whom more heereafter: and of late magnificently reedified by the meanes of the Captaine: unto which Castle there belonged very many Knights Fees, and above all other places it hath heere the glory for antiquitie: Brading, another mercate Towne, Newton and Yarmouth anciently called Eremue, which have their Majors, and send Burgesses to the Parliament. This Yarmouth and Sharp ore have Castles in them, which together with Worsleys fort or Blockehouse (so named of a worshipfull familie) defend the Sea-shore at the North∣west. Just over against it, scarcely two miles off standeth Hurst a fortification of South-Hamptonshire, scituate upon a little necke of land lying into the Sea: Quarre, where was founded a Nunnerie in the yeare of our Lord 1131: Gods-Hill, in which Iohn Worsley erected a Schoole for the training up of young wits, West-Cowe and East-Cowe, that is now ruinous: both which, King Henry the Eighth built at the very en∣trie of New port: and concerning them Leland wrote in this wise: Covae fulmineae duae coruscant Haec casum colit, ille Solis ortum Vectam quà Neoportus intrat altam, Two Cowes full opposite there stand, At West and East, in all mens sight: Then flashen fire from either hand, Where Newport, entreth Isle of Wight. Also on the North-East side Sandham Castle, furnished as the rest, with great ord∣nance. Neither are there wanting for the defence of this Isle naturall fences. For, encircled it is with a continuall ridge and raunge as it were of craggy clifts; there are under the waters likewise hidden stones: and every where there lie against it, bankes and rockes perilous for sailers: but the most dangerous of all the rest are the Needles, so called because they are so sharpe, and the Shingles ; which stand forth against the West angle of the Isle: as also the Owers and Mixon that lie before the East. Besides these, The Brambles, which are Shelves and perilous for Sailers, in the North-coast. Moreover if there be any place that seemeth open and meete for a landing place, the same by an old order and custome among them is piled with strong stakes driven and pitched deepe into the ground. But verily this Isle is neither with these rockes, nor with those fortresses above said so well fenced, The Inhabi∣tants. as with the very Inhabitants themselves, who naturally being most warlike, bold, and adventurous, are through the diligence and care of the Captaine of the Isle, confirmed so by continuall exercise in strength and militarie discipline, that they exactly know before hand, (what accidents of service soever may happen in warre) namely with their peeces to shoot point-blanke and not misse the marke, to keepe their rankes, to march orderly, and in ray, to cast their squadrons if need be close into a ring, or to display and spred the same at large, to take paines, to runne, and ride, to endure both Sunne and dust, and fully to performe whatsoever warfarre doth require. Of these souldiers thus trained the Isle it selfe is able to bring forth in∣to the field 4000. and at the instant of all assaies appointed there bee three thousand more of most expert and practised servitours out of Hampshire, and two thousand beside out of Wilshire, to bee ever prest, and in readinesse for the defence of the Isle. And to the end that all hostile forces whatsoever might bee withstood more speedi∣ly, and with greater facilitie, the whole countrey is divided into eleven parts: and e∣very of them hath their severall Centoner, as one would say, Centurion, their Vintons also, leaders as it were, of twenty, their great pieces of Ordnance, their Sentinels and warders. Who keepe watch and ward at the Beacons standing on the higher grounds: their Posts also, or runners, whom by an old name growne almost out of use, they terme still Hoblers, who presently give intelligence of all occurrents to the Captaine and Governour of the Isle. The first that brought it in subjection to the Romans, In Vespati cap. 4. was Vespatian, whiles he served as a private person under Claudius Caesar: For, thus writeth Suetonius of him. Vnder the Emperour Claudius, by speciall favour of Narcissus, he was sent into Germanie as Lieu∣tenant of a Legion: and from thence being remooved into Britaine, he fought thirtie battailes with the enemie. Two most mightie nations, and above twentie townes, together with the Isle of Wight, lying next to the said Britaine hee subdued, under the conduct partly of A. Plautius a Consular Lieutenant, and in part of Claudius himselfe. For which service he re∣ceived triumphall ornaments, and in short space two sacerdotall dignities, &c. At this Isle also, the navie of Allectus; after he had usurped the Imperiall dignitie in Britaine, lying in espiall and ambush, awaited the Romans comming against him, who not∣withstanding by the happy meanes of a mist passed by their enemies undescried, gat to land, and set fire on their owne ships, that there might bee no refuge for them, to escape unto by flight. Anno D. 5 Lord Cerdic was the first English-Saxon that subdued it, and he granted it unto Stuffa, and Whitgar, who joyntly togither slew well-neare all the British Inhabitants (for few there were of them remaining) in Whitgaraburge a towne so called of his name, and now by contraction shortned into Caresbroke. After, Wolpher King of the Mercians reduced the Isle of Wight under his obedience, and as∣signed it over to Edelwalch King of the South-Saxons, together with the province of the Menvari, what time as hee became his Godfather, and answered for him at his Baptisme. Bede lib. 4. cap. 13. Then, Ceadwalla King of the West-Saxons, when the said Edelwalch was slaine, and Aruandus the petty King of the Island made away, annexed to it the Do∣minion, and in a tragicall, and lamentable massacre killed every mothers child almost of the inborne Inhabitants, and the fourth part of the Isle, to wit as much land as con∣tained 300. Hides, hee gave unto Bishop Wilfrid. The first that instructed the Islan∣ders in the knowledge of Christian religion. But these matters Beda will informe you best, writing as he doth, in these words. After then that Ceadwalla had obtained the kingdome of the Gevissi, hee wonne also the Isle of Wight: Bede lib. 4. cap. 16. which unto that time had beene wholly given to Idolatrie; and then endea∣voured what he could to make a generall massacre and tragicall slaughter of all the native In∣habitants thereof, and instead of them to plant there people of his owne province; binding himselfe with a vow, although he was not yet regenerate and become Christened, and in case he wonne the Isle, he would give unto God a fourth part both of it and also of the whole booty. Which vow he so paied, as that he offered this Isle, unto Wilfrid the Bishop (who being of his nation hapened then to come thither & be present) to the use and glory of God. The measure of the same Island according to the English mens estimation is proportionable to one thousand and two hundred hides of land. Whereupon the Bishop had possession given him of so much Land as rose to three hundred Hides. But hee, commended that portion which hee recei∣ved unto one of his Clarkes named Bernwin, and his sisters sonne he was, giving unto him a priest named Hildila, for to minister unto all that were desirous of salvation, the word and laver of life. Where I thinke it not good to passe over in silence, how, for the first fruits (as one would say) of those who of the same Isle were saved by their beleife, two young children brethren, of the Royall bloud, to wit, the sonnes of Arvandus King of the Isle, were by the especiall favour of GOD crowned with martyrdome) For, when the enemies ap∣proached hard unto the Island, these children slipt secretly out of the Isle, and were remo ∣ved into the province next adjoyning; where being brought to a place called Ad Lapidem, when they had committed themselves upon trust, to be hidden from the face of the King that was conquerour, betraied they were and commanded to be killed. Which when a certaine Ab∣bat and Priest named Cynbreth heard, who not farre from thence had his monasterie in a place named Reodford, that is the Ford of reed, hee came unto the King, who then in those parts lay secretly at cure of those wounds which hee had received whiles hee fought in the Isle of Wight, and requested of him, that if there were no remedie but that the children must bee murthered, they might yet bee first taught the Sacraments of Christian faith before their death. The King granted his petition, and hee then having catechised them in the word of truth, and bathed them in the fount of salvation, assured them of their entrance in∣to the everlasting Kingdome of heaven. And so within a while after, when the execu∣tioner, called instantly for them, they joyfully suffered that temporall death of the body, by which they made no doubt of their passe unto the eternall life of their soules. In this order and manner therefore after all the Provinces of Britaine had embraced the faith of Christ, the Isle of Wight also received the same: in which notwithstanding for the calamitie and trou∣ble of forraine subjection, no man tooke the degree of Ministerie, and See Episcopall before Daniell, who at this day is the Bishop of the West Saxons and the Gevissj. Thus much Beda. From this time forward our writers for a great while have not one word of Wight unto the yeare of our Lord, one thousand sixtie six, in which, Tostie Hing Haralds bro∣ther with certaine men of warre, and Rovers ships out of Flanders in hatred of his brother invaded it, and after he had compelled the Islanders to pay him tribute, de∣parted. Some few yeares after, as we read in the old booke of Cares broke Priorie, which Ma∣ster Robert Glover Somerset, shewed me, who carried as it were the Sunne light of ancient Genealogies and Pedigrees in his hand. Like as, saith this booke, William the Bastard conque∣red England, even so William Fitz Osbern his Mareschal and Earle of Hereford, conque∣red the Isle of Wight, and was the first Lord of Wight. Long after this, the Frenchmen in the yeare 1377. came suddenly at unawares under saile, invaded and spoiled it: and the same French in the yeare 1403. gave the like attempt, but in vaine: For valiantly they were drived from landing even as in our fathers daies, when the French Gallies set one or two small cottages on fire and went their way. Lords of the Isle of Wight. As touching the Lords of this Isle, after that William Fitz-Osbern was forth-with slaine in the warre of Flanders, and his sonne Roger outlawed and driven unto exile, it fell into the Kings hands: and Henrie the First, King of England gave it unto Ri∣chard Ridvers (otherwise called Redvers and de Ripariis ) Earle of Denshire, and with∣all, the Fee or Inheritance of the Towne Christ-Church. Christ-Church. Where, like as at Cares∣broke, that Richard built certaine Fortresses: but Baldwin his sonne, in the trouble∣some time of King Stephen, when there were in England so many Tyrants, as there were Lords of Forts and Castles, who tooke upon them every one to stampe money and challenged other rights of Regall Majestie, was by Stephen disseized and ex∣pelled from hence. Howbeit, his posteritie recovered their ancient right, whose Genealogie wee have already put downe when wee treated of the Earles of Den∣shire. But in the end, Isabell widow to William de Fortibus, Earle of Albemarle and Holdernesse, sister and heire of Baldwin the last Earle of Devonshire of that house, after much intreatie was overcome to make over by charter all her right and inte∣rest, and to settle it upon King Edward the First▪ with the Manours of Christ-Church, and Fawkeshaul, &c. For foure thousand Markes. Ever since which time, the Kings of England held the Isle, and Henry de Beau∣champ Earle of Warwicke was by King Henrie the Sixth, unto whom hee was most deere, crowned King of Wight, and afterwards nominated, The first or principall Earle of all England. But together with him this new and unusuall title died and vanished quite. Afterwards Richard Widevile Earle Rivers was by King Edward the fourth stiled Lord of the Isle of Wight, & Sir Reginald Bray took it of King Henry the Seventh, (with whom he was most inward) in Fee farme, for a rent charg'd, of three hundred markes yearely to be paid. Also, beside these Lords, this Isle had a noble Familie, named de Insula, or Lisle, out of which in the raigne of King Edward the Second, one was summoned unto the Parliament by the name of Sir Iohn Lisle, of the Isle of Wight. ATTREBATII. A S in Or Gaule. France, so also in Britaine, next adjoyning unto the Belgae, are ATTREBATII, which name being now altogether out of use, the place which they inhabite is commonly called Barkshire. For, let this stand as gran∣ted, (seeing Cesar writeth the forrainers comming out of Gallia Belgica inhabited the sea coasts of Britaine, and retained still the names of their countries) that these our ATTREBATII, ATTREBATES of Gaule: France. who as Ptolomee recordeth, held the ma∣ritime part of Gaule, lying upon the river Sein, and namely, that very countrey, which after a sort lieth full opposite and over against our At∣trebatii. It was not therefore without good cause, if Cesar wrote, that Co∣mius Attrebatensis was of great authority in these countries, Comius Attre∣batensis. namely a∣mong his owne countrimen; and that after hee was by Cesar vanquished, he fled hither: In stratage∣mat. what time, as Frontinus writeth, whiles his ships were grounded upon a shelfe, he commanded his sailes to be hoised up, and so dis∣appointed Cesar (who pursued him) of his purpose: who kenning a-farre-of, his full sailes, and supposing that with a good gale of forewind he sailed away, gave over further pursuit. Whence these Attrebatii were so called, it resteth doubtfull: For whereas some fetch the originall from Attrech, which in the old Gauls tongue they would have to signifie a land of Bread, I neither approve nor disprove their opinion Suf∣ficient it may be for us, to have shewed, from whence they came into Britaine; as for the deriva∣tion of their name, let others search into it. COMITATUS Bercheri vulgo Bark∣shyre qui olim sedes A∣TREBATVM BARKSHIRE. T Hat countrie which we call Barkshire, the late Latine writers terme Bercheria, and was somtime by the English Saxons named . Asserius. Which name Asserius Menevensis deriveth from a certaine wood called Berroc where grew good store of box: others from a naked, or bare oake (for so much the name Beroke it selfe importeh) unto which, the Inhabitants in dangers and troublesome times of the commonwealth were wont in old time to resort, there to consult about their publike affaires. The North part hereof the ri∣ver Isis which afterwards is called Tamisis, that is, the Tamis, running with a win∣ding channell full of reaches, but carrying a very gentle streame, doth pleasantly wa∣ter it, and first severeth it from Oxfordshire, afterwards from Buckinghamshire. The South side, where it beareth toward Hantshire, the river Kenet cutteth through, untill it runnes into the Tamis. In the West, where it bordereth upon Wiltshire and carri∣eth the greatest breadth, as also in the middle part, rich it is of it selfe and full of com∣modities, yeelding corne in plenty; especially where it falleth lower to a valley: which I wotte not from what shape of a white horse imagined to appeare in a whitish chalky hill, they terme, The vale of Whitehorse. As for the East part that confineth with Sur∣rie, it groweth very barraine, or at least wise the soile is lesse fertile, as standing upon forrests and woods that take up a great ground in length and breadth. In the West march thereof neere unto Ouze. Isis, standeth Farendon, seated high: fa∣mous now, for a mercate there kept, but in times past, for a certaine Fort, which Ro∣bert Earle of Glocester built against King Stephen, who notwithstanding wonne it with bloudy assaults, Farendon. and laid it so levell with the ground, that now it is not to bee seene. Guil. New brig sis. But the plot of ground whereon it stood, as we finde in the Chronicle of Wa∣verley Abbay, King Iohn in the yeere of our Lord 1202. prevented by divine inspiration granted with all the appurtenances to the building of an Abbay for the Cistercians order. From hence the river having with a great turning compasse after much wrestling, gotten out towards the North, passeth a long hard by many villages of small recko∣ning till at length with a returne, Abbendu or Abing and disporting it selfe with winding branches and divisions, he commeth to Abbendon, a proper towne, and populous: called at first by the English Saxons , then Abbandune, no doubt▪ of the Abbay, rather then of one Abben I wote not what Irish Eremite, as some have written. A place this was (as we finde in an old booke of Abbendon) upon the plaine of an hill very faire and delecta∣ble to see too a little beyond the town which now is called Suniggewelle, betweene two most plea∣sant rivelets, which enclosing within them the place it selfe (as it were a certaine nooke) yeeld a delightsome sight to the beholders, and a meete succour to the Inhabitants. The very same was in times past called Sheovesham, a Citie famous, goodly to behold, full of riches, compassed about with most plentuous fields, with greene medowes, patious pastures, and flockes of cattell spinning forth milke abundantly. H ere was the Kings seat: hither resorted and assembled the people, when soever there was any treaty about the chiefe, and highest affaires of the king∣dome. But so soone as Cissa King of the West Saxons had built the Abbay, it beganne by little and little to lay downe the old name, and to be called Abbendon, and Ab∣bington, that is, Abbay-towne. This Abbay had not long flourished, when all of a sodaine in a tempestuous fury of the Danes it was subverted; Yet soone after it was reared againe through the bounty of King Edgar, and afterwards by the meanes, & travaile of the Norman Abbats grew by little and little to such magnificence, that among all the Abbaies of Britaine for riches, and statelinesse it would hardly give place to any. Which the very rubble and ruines at this day doe testifie. H ic Quin∣tus quarto fun∣daverat anno. Rex, Burford super undas, at{que} Culhamford. As for the towne, albeit along time it had a great stay of the Abbay, yet since the yeere of our salvation 1416. in which King Henrie the Fifth built Bridges over the River Isis or Ouse (as witnesseth a verse written in a window of Saint Helens Church there) and turned the Kings high way hither for to make a shorter passage, it beganne to bee frequented and traded so, that among all the townes of this shire, it goes for the chiefe, hath a Major in it, and maketh great gaine by that steeped barly sprouting and chitting againe, K. Henry of that name the fifth the fourth yeare of his reigne, both Burford Bridge and Culham∣ford, did found on River mayne. which the Greekes terme Byne and wee Malt sand besides, hath a Crosse, of singular workemanship in the mids of their mer∣cate place (which by report,) in the reigne of King Henrie the sixth▪ the Brotherhood of Saint Crosse instituted by him, did erect. As Cissa founded this monasterie for Monkes: so Cilla (out of an old booke I speake) the sister of King Cedwalla built the Nunnerie at Helnestowe neere the Tamis, where her selfe was Ladie Abbasse over the Virgins, who afterwards were translated to Witham. And whiles the warre grew hote betweene Offa and Kinulphe, when a Castle was there built, the Nunnes retired themselves out of the way. For, after that Kinulph was overthrowne, whatso∣ever lay under his jurisdiction from the towne of Wallengford in the South part, from Iche∣nildstreete unto Essebury, Now, Ash∣bury neere to White horse hill. and in the North side to the river Tamis. King Offa usurped and seized into his owne hands. Neere unto it, Northwest lieth Lee, which by the daughter of a certaine worship∣full Knight surnamed thereupon, de Lee, fell to the familie of Besiles, and thereof it came to bee called Besiles Lee: and from that house in right of marriage, to Richard Fetiplace: Besides Lee. Fetiplace. whose Progenitor Thomas brought some honor to his posterity by match∣ing with Beatrice the base daughter of Iohn the first, King of Portugall, and widdow to Gilbert Lord Talbot, of whom they are descended. But now, let us returne. Hard by Abendon, Ocke a little river that runneth by the South side of the towne, (over which in times past Sir Iohn of Saint Helenes, Knight, built a bridge,) gently falleth into Ouse. Isis: This Ocke springeth in that vale of Whitehorse scarce a mile or two from Kingston-Lisle, in olde time the possession of Warin de Insulâ, or Lisle, a no∣ble Baron. Vicount Lisle. From whom when as Sir Iohn Talbot the younger sonne of that renowned warrior, Iohn Earle of Shrewsburie was descended by his mother, hee was created by King Henrie the Sixth Lord Lisle, like as Warin de Insula in times past in regard of the possession of this place, (as if that dignity were annexed thereto) and afterwards Vi∣count Lisle : by a Patent without any such regard. This title through the gratious favor of Kings flourished still in his posterity one after another successively. See the Earles of Shrews∣bury. For, breifly to knit up their succession, When Sir Thomas Talbot sonne of the said Iohn departed this life without issue, beeing deadly shot into the mouth with an arrow in a skirmish defending his possessions against the Lord Barkley. Sir Edward Grey who had mar∣ried his sister, received the same at the hands of King Richard the third, and left it to Iohn his sonne, and successour. Whose onely daughter and heire King Henrie the Eighth assured to Sir Charles Brandon, and thereupon created him Vicount. Lisle. But when as shee died in tender yeeres before the marriage was solemnized, hee al∣so relinquished that title. Which King Henrie afterward bestowed upon Sir Ar∣thur Plantagenet base sonne to King Edward the fourth. Who had wedded Eli∣zabeth sister to Sir Iohn Grey Vicount Lisle, and widdow of Edmund Dudley. And when hee deceased without heires male, the said King honoured therewith Sir Iohn Dudley sonne of Edmund by the same Elizabeth Grey, who in the time of King Edward the sixth was created Duke of Northumberland, and afterward attainted by Queene Marie. His sonne Sir Ambrose Dudley beeing restored in bloud, was by Queene Elizabeth on one and the selfe same day created Lord Lisle, and Earle of Warwicke, who ended his life issuelesse. And now lately Sir Robert Sidney his sisters sonne was honoured with the stile of Vicoun Lisle by King Iames, who had before created him (beeing Chamberlaine to the Queene his wife) Baron Sidney of Pen∣sherst. Then runneth the river Ocke aforesaid, betweene Pusey, which they that are na∣med de Pusey hold it yet by the horn from their ancestors, as given unto them in anci∣ent time by K. Canutus the Dane, Pusey. Denchworth. and the two Dencheworths the one and the other; where flourished for a long time two noble and auncient houses, to wit, de Hide at the one, and Fetiplace at the other, which families may seeme to have sprung out of one and the same stocke, considering they both beare one and the same coat of armes. Then entertaineth Ock a namelesse river, which issueth out of the same vale, at Wan∣tage called in the English Saxon tongue , where some time there was a Ma∣nour house of the Kings, Wantage. and the place wherein Aelfred that most noble and renow∣ned King was borne and bred, which at his death he bequeathed to Alfrith. Long time after, it became a mercate towne by the meanes and helpe of Sir Fulke Fitzwarin that most warlike Knight, Fitzwarin. upon whom Roger Bigod Mareschall of England had bestowed it for his martiall prowesse, and at this daie it acknowledgeth for Lords thereof the Bourchiers, Earles of Bath descended from the race of the Fitzwarins, of whose fa∣milie some were here buried. Isis being departed once from Abbendon, straight waies receiveth into it out of Oxfordshire, the river Tame (of which elsewhere) and now by a compound word be∣ing called Tamisis ; Tamisis or Tamis the River. Sinodum. first directeth his course to Sinodun an high hill, and fenced with a deepe trench, were stood, for certaine, in old time a fortresse of the Romanes: for, the ground being now broken up with the plough, yeeldeth otherwhiles to the ploughmen, store of Roman pieces of coine, as tokens of antiquitie. Under it at Bretwell, there was a Castle, (if it were not that upon this hill) which King Henry the Second wonne by force, Bretwell. Robert Mon¦tensis. a little before that he made peace with King Stephen. From hence Tamis, holdeth on his way to the chiefe Citie in times past of the Attreba∣tians, which Antonius termeth, GALLEVA of Attrebats, Ptolomee GALEVA, but both of them through the carelessnesse of the Scriveners name it wrong, for, GAL∣LENA: and they likewise in their Greeke copies have thrust upon us, , for, Gal∣lena, by transposition of letters. Gallena. I have thought it was so named in the British tongue, as it were, Guall hen, that is, The old rampier or fort. Which name being still kept, and [ Ford ] added thereto, Wallengfor which is a shallow place in the river,: the Englishmen in old time called it , and , and we at this day, shorter Walleng∣ford. In King Edward the Confessors time, it was counted a Burgh ), and contained (as we find in that Book wherein K. William the Frst, Domesday booke. tooke the Survey of all Eng∣land two hundred, threescore, and sixteene Hages, that is to say, Houses, yielding nine pounds de Gablo, and those that dwelt there, did the King service on horsebacke, or by wa∣ter. Of those Hages eight were destroyed for the Castle. In old time it was compassed about with walles, which, as men may see by their tract, tooke up a mile in circuit. It hath a Castle scituate upon the river, very large (I assure you) and stately, so forti∣tified in times past, that the hope in it, (as impregnable and invincible) made di∣vers over-bold and stout. For, when England burned (as a man may say) in a gene∣rall flame of warres, we read, that it was by King Stephen belaied once or twise with sieges, but all in vaine. The greatnesse and magnificence thereof I much wondered at when I was young, and removed thither from Oxford (for a place it is now for the Students there of Christ Church, to retire unto) as having a double range of walles a∣bout it, and being compassed round likewise with a duple rampier and ditch: and in the midst of it, there standeth a tower to keepe, raised upon a mightie high mount: in the steepe ascent whereof by steps, we saw a Well of an exceeding depth. The In∣habitants are verily perswaded, that it was built by the Danes; but I should rather judge, that something was here erected by the Romans, and afterwards rased by Saxons, and Danes, what time as Sueno the Dane, ranging and roving this way spoi∣led, and harried the countrey. That it was at length reedified under King William the first, we know assuredly by Domesday book, seeing that it yeeldeth record (as even now I noted) of eight Hages or Houses destroyed for the Castle. Yet William Gemeti∣censis makes no mention of this Castle, when he writeth, that William of Norman∣die having defeited Harold, led his armie forthwith to this citie (so he termeth it) and after he had passed over the Tamis at the ford, pitched his tents heere before hee came to London. At which time Wigod an Englishman was Lord of Wallengford, who had one onely daughter given in marriage to Robert D'Oyley, Records of Wallengford. of whom he be∣gat Mawd his sole heire, first wedded to Miles Crispin, and after his death, through the goodnesse and favour of K. Henrie the first, married unto Brient, called Fitz Count; Who being brought up in warlike feates, Co itis. and taking part with Mawde the Empresse, most manfully defended this Castle against King Stephen, who had raised a fort just over against it at Craumesh: and he made it good, untill that peace so much wished of all England, was concluded in this place: and that most grievous dissention about the Crowne, betweene K. Stephen, and Henrie the Second ended. For, then the love of God tooke such place in the hearts of the said Brient, and his wife, that they cast of this fraile and transitorie world, and devoted themselves in religious life unto Christ: so was this Honour of Wallengford escheated into the Kings hand. Which appeareth out of an old Inquisition in the Exchequer, by these words. To his most be∣loved Lords, Of the honor of Walleng∣ford. in Testa. evilli in the Exchequer. the King our soveraigne Lord, his Iustices, and Barons of the Exchequer, the Constable of Wallengford sendeth greeting. Know ye, that I have made diligent enquiry by the Knights of my Bayliwicke, according to a commandement of my Lord the King, dire∣cted unto me by the Sheriffe: and of the Inquisition thus made, this is the summe. Wigod of Wallengford, held the honour of Wallengford in King Harolds time, and afterwards in the daies of King William the First: He had by his wife a certaine daughter whom he gave in marriage to Robert D'Oyly. This Robert begat of her a daughter, named Mawd, who was his heire. Miles Crispin espoused her, and had with her the honour aforesaid of Wallengford. After the decease of Miles, our soveraigne Lord King Henrie the first, bestowed the a∣foresaid Mawd upon Brient Fitz Count, who both tooke themselves to a religious life, and King Henrie the Second seized the honour into his hand, &c. Yet afterwards in the time of King Henrie the Third, it belonged to the Earles of Chester: and then to Richard King of the Romans, and Earle of Cornwall, who repaired it, and unto his sonne Ed∣mond, who within the inner Court founded a Collegiate Chappell, who dying with∣out issue, it fell againe to the Crowne, and was annexed to the Dukedome of Corn∣wall: since which time it hath by little and little decaied. And verily about the time when that most mortall Plague which followed the conjunction of Saturne and Mars in Capricorne, reigned hotely throughout all Europe, in the yeare of our Lord 1348. This towne was so dispeopled by reason of continuall mortalitie there, A most grie∣vous Pesti∣lence. that whereas before time it was passing well Inhabited, and had twelve Churches in it, it can shew now no more than one or two. But the cause of this desolation the Inhabitants lay rather upon the bridges of Abbindon and Dorchester, whereby London portway was turned from thence. Moules-ford. From hence Southward, the Tamis passeth most mildly betweene very rich and fertile fields on both sides, by Moules-ford : which K. Henrie the first gave unto Girald Fitz-Walter, Carew. from whence the Noble family of the Carewes is descended. To this house, much lands, honour, and reputation accrewed, in Ireland by descent, and in England by matching in marriage with right noble families of the Mohuns, Dinhams, and others. Aldworth. Not farre from hence is Aldworth, where be certaine tombes and por∣traictures, bigger than the ordinary proportion of men: which thereupon the un∣learned multitude keepes a wondering at, as if they had been Giants: whereas indeed, they were but of certaine Knights of the Family de la Beche, which heere had a Ca∣stle, and is thought in the raigne of King Edward the Third to have beene extingui∣shed for default of issue male. And now at length, Tamis meeteth with Kenet, which River, The River Kenet. Hungerford. as I said ere-while, watering the South part of this shire, at his first entry when he hath left Wiltshire behind him, runneth under Hungerford, named in old time In∣gleford Charnam-street : 1. p rs dupl. patent. Norm. 6. . 5. Barons of Hungerford. a very small towne, and seated in a moist place; howbeit, it hath given name and title to the honorable family of the Barons of Hungerford, which was first raised to greatnesse by Walter Hungerford, who under King Henrie the Fifth, being Seneschall or Steward of the Kings house▪ was for his warlike prow∣esse liberally rewarded by the said king and infeoffed in the Castle and Barony of Ho∣met in Normandie, To have and to hold unto him and his heires males by homage and ser∣vice, to find the Kings and his heires at the Castle of Roan, one Launce with a Fox taile hang∣ing downe thereat: which pleasant conceit, I thought not a misse to insert here among serious matters. The same Walter in the raigne of Henrie the Sixth, being high Treasurer of England, and created withall Baron Hungerford, as well by his singu∣lar wisedome, as his marriage mith Katherine Peverell (descended from the Moels, and Courtneys, ) mightily augmented his state. His sonne Robert, who wedded the daughter and heire of the Lord Botereaux, enriched the same house verie much, Sir Robert likewise his sonne, who matched with Eleanor, the daughter and heire of William Molines) whereupon he was summoned among the Barons of the Realme by the name of Lord Molines) and during the civill warre betweene the two houses of Lancaster and Yorke, was beheaded at Newcastle, advanced the name not a lit∣tle. His sonne Thomas, slaine at Salisbury, while his father was living, left his onely daughter named Marie, whom Edward Lord Hastings, tooke to wife with a great and rich Inheritance. But Walter, brother to the said Thomas, begat Edward Hun∣gerford, father of that Walter, whom King Henrie the Eighth created Baron Hun∣gerford of Heitesbury, and condemned him afterwards for a crime not to be spo∣ken of: Widehay. howbeit, Queene Marie restored his children unto all his estate, save onely the name and title of Barons. Not farre from hence Southward is Widehay, the seat for a long time of the Baron De S. Am Barons de Amand. Saint Amand, whose inheritance Gerard Bray∣brooke entred upon in right of his wife, whose eldest Niece by his sonne Gerard, na∣med Elizabeth, by her marriage brought the same unto William de Beauchamp, who being summoned to the Parliament by the name of William Beauchamp de Saint Amando, Beaucha De S. ma flourished among other Barons, like as his sonne Richard, who left no issue lawfully begotten. Kenet keeping on his course downward from thence, betweene Hemsted Marshall, which sometimes was held by the rod of Marshalsee, and appertained to the Mares∣chals of England where S. Thomas Parry Treasurer of Queene Elizabeths houshold, built a very proper house, and Benham Valence in a Parke so called, because it belonged to William de Valencia Earle of Pembroch. But Queen Elizabeth gave it to Iohn Baptista Castilion a Piemontes, of her privie chamber for faithfull service in her dangers. So the river passeth on to that old town Spinae, wherof Antonine made mention: which re∣taining still the name is at this day called Spene: Spine. but now in steed of a towne it is a ve∣ry little village standing scarce a mile off from Newbury a famous towne that arose and had beginning out of the ruins of it. For Newbury with us is as much to say, as the Newburgh, Newbury in respect no doubt, of that more ancient place of habitation which is quite decayed and gone, and hath left the name also in a peece of Newburie it selfe which is called Spinham Lands. And if nothing else, yet this verily might prove that Newburie sprang out of Spine, because the inhabitants of Newbury acknowledge the village Spene as their mother, although in comparison of Spene it be passing faire and goodly, as well for buildings as furniture: become rich also by clothing, and very well seated in a champian plaine, having the river Kenet to water it. This towne at the time that the Normans conquered England, fell to Ernulph de Hesdin Earle of Perch: whose successour Thomas Earle of Perch, being slaine at the siege of Lin∣colne, the Bishop of Chalons his heire sold it unto William Marescall Earle of Pem∣broke, who also held the Manour of Hempsted hard by (whereof I have spoken) and his successors also Mareschals of England, untill that Roger Bigod for his obstinacie lost his honor and possessions both, which notwithstanding by intreaty he obtained a∣gaine for his life time. Kenet passeth on hence and taketh into him Lamborn a little river, Lambor which at the head and spring thereof imparteth his name to a small mercate towne, that in old time by vertue of King Aelfreds testament belonged unto his cousin Alfrith, and afterward to the Fitz Warens, who of King Henrie the Third obtained libertie of hol∣ding a mercate, but now appertaineth unto the Essexes, Knights: A familie that fetcheth their pedigree from William Essex Vnder-treasurer of England under King Edward the Fourth, & from those who in times past carried the same surname, & flourished as men of very great fame in Essex. From thence he runneth under Den∣nington, which others call Dunnington a little castle, but a fine and proper one, situ∣ate with a faire prospect upon the brow of a prety hill full of groves, and which in∣wardly for the most part letteth in all the light. Built, they say, it was by Sir Ri∣chard de Abberbury Knight, who also under it founded for poore people a Almeshouse. Gods-house. Afterward, it was the residence of Chaucer, then of the Dela Poles, and in our fathers daies of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke. Kenet having now finished a long course, by Aldermaston which King Henrie the First gave unto Robert Achard : From whose posterity by the Delamares it came at length in right of marriage to the Fosters a familie of Knights degree, Aldermaston. falleth at the last into Tamis, presently after it hath with his winding branches compassed a great part of Reading. Reading. This towne Reading, called in the English Saxon tongue , of Rhea ; that is, The River, or of the British word Redin, that signifieth Fearne, (which groweth heere in great plentie) excelleth at this day all other townes of this shire in faire streets, and goodly houses: for wealth also of the Townsmen, and their name in making of cloth, although it hath lost the greatest ornaments it had, to wit, a beautifull Church and a most ancient Castle. For this the Danes kept as their hold, (so Asserius writeth) when they made a rampier betweene Kenet and Tamis, and into this they retired themselves for safety when at Inglefield (a village neere unto it, which gave name to an ancient familie) they were by King Aethel∣wolfe discomfited, and put to flight. But King Henrie the Second so rased it (because it was a place of refuge for King Stephens followers) that nothing now remaineth of it but the bare name in the next street. Nigh whereunto, King Henrie the First having plucked downe a little Nun∣nerie that Queene Alfrith had founded in former times, to make satisfaction for her wicked deeds, built for Monks a stately and sumptuous Abbay, and enriched it with great revenewes. Which Prince, to speake out of his very Charter of the foundation, Because three Abbaies in the Realme of England were in old time for their sinnes destroi∣ed, to wit, Reading, Chelseie, and Leonminster, which a long time were held in Lay mens hands: by the advise of the Bishops, built a new Monasterie of Reading and gave unto it Reading, Chelseie, and Leonminster. In this Abbay was the founder himselfe King Henrie, Maude the Empresse. buried with his wife both vailed and crowned for that shee had beene a Queene, and a professed Nunne, and with them their daughter Mawde, as witnesseth the private Historie of this place, although some report, that she was en∣terred at Becc in Normandie. This Mawde as well as that Lacedemonian Ladie Lam∣pido, whom Plinie maketh mention of, was a Kings daughter, a Kings wife, and a Kings mother: that is to say, daughter of this Henrie the First, King of England, wife of Henrie the Fourth, Emperour of Almaine, and mother to Henrie the Second, King of England. Concerning which matter have you here a Distichon engraven on her tombe, and the same verily in my judgment conceived in some gracious aspect of the Muses. Magna ortu, majorque viro, sed maxima partu, Hîc jacet Henrici filia, sponsa, parens. The daughter, wife, the mother eke, of Henrie, lieth heere; Much blest by birth, by marriage more, but most by issue deere. And well might she be counted greatest by her issue: For, Henrie the Second her sonne, as Iohn of Salisburie who lived in those daies wrote; was the best and most vertuous King of Britaine, King Henry the second. the most fortunate Duke of Normandie and Aquitain: and as well for valiant exploits, as for excellent vertues highly renowned. How courageous, how magnificent, how wise and modest he was even from his tender yeeres, envy it selfe can nei∣ther conceale nor dissemble: seeing that his acts bee fresh and conspicuous: seeing also, that he hath extended forward and held on in a continued traine, the titles of his vertue from the bounds of Britaine unto the marches of Spaine. And in another place of the same King▪ Henrie the Second the most mighty King that ever was of Britaine, shewed his puissance about the river Garumna; and laying siege to Tolose, with fortunate successe terrified not onely those of Province as farre as to Rhosne and the Alpes, but also by raising fortresses & subduing nations, he made the princes of Spaine and France to quake for feare, as if he had beene ever more at the point to set upon them all. I will, also if it please you, adjoyne heereto a word, or two concerning the same King, out of Giraldus Combren∣sis. From the Pyrenean mountaines, saith hee, unto the Westerne bounds, and furthest li∣mits of the North Ocean, This our Alexander of the West hath stretched forth his arme. As farre therefore as nature in these our parts hath enlarged the land, so farre hath hee marched with Victories. If the bounds of his expeditions were sought for, sooner would the globe of earth faile, than they end. For where there is a valiant and courageous minde, howsoever earth and land faile, victories cannot faile: well may there bee wanting matter of triumph, but triumphs will never bee wanting. How great an addition to his glorious titles and triumphs was Ireland? with how great valour and praise-worthy prowesse pearced he through the very secrets and hidden places of the Ocean? But lo heere an old verse of his death, which briefely in one word containeth fully both all this, and also the re∣nowne of his sonne King Richard the first. Mira cano, Sol occubuit, nox nulla sequuta est. A wonder great, the Sunne was set, and night there followed none. For, King Richa the first. so farre was King Richard his sonne from bringing darknesse with him, that with the beames of his victories atchieved in Cypres and Syria, he made our coun∣trey of England most famous and renowned through the world. But these are things without our Element. Let us returne againe from persons to places. This Monastery wherein that noble King Henrie the first was buried is now converted to bee the Kings house, which hath adjoyning unto it a very goodly stable stored to the full with princelike and most generous steeds. But as touching this place, listen also to the Poet describing the Tamis as he passeth heereby. Hinc videt exiguam Chawsey, properatque videre Redingum nitidum, texendis nobile pannis. Hoc docet Aelfredi nostri victricia signa, Begscegi caedem, calcata cadavera Dani: Vtque superfuso maduerunt sanguine campi. Principis hîc Zephiro Cauroque parentibus ort Cornipides crebris implent binnitibus auras, Et gyros ducunt, gressus glomerantque superbos Dum cupiunt nostri Martis servire lupatis. Haeccine sed pietas? heu dira piacula, primum Neustrius Henricus situs hîc, inglorius urna Nunc jacet erectus, tumulum novus advena quaerit Frustra; nam regi tenues invidit arenas Auri sacra fames, Regum metuenda sepulchris. From hence he little Chawsey seeth, and hastneth for to see Faire Reading towne, a place of name, where Cloth's ywoven be. This shewes our Aelfrids victorie, what time Begsceg was slaine, With other Danes, whose carcasses lay trampled on the plaine; And how the fields ydrenched were with bloud upon them shed▪ Where as the Prince in Stable now hath standing many a steed Of noblest kind, that neigh and snort into the aire a lowd Tracing the ring and keeping pace that stately is, and prowd, Whiles they desire to learne with all in our warres for to serve, But where (alas) is piety? Such cursed deeds deserve Purged to be by sacrifice. A King of Normans race Henry the first, enterred heere, now turn'd out of his place, An out cast lies dishonoured. Who seekes his tombe shall misse: For Covetise envied that King the small mould which was his. See see, how Princes monuments it ransacks where it is. Scarce halfe a mile from Reading, betwixt most greene and flowring medowes, the Kenet is coupled with the Tamis, who now runneth with a broader streame by a small village called Sunning, Sunning. which a man would mervaile to have beene the See of eight Bishops who had this shire & Wiltshire for their Diocesse (yet our Histories report as much) the same afterwards by Herman was translated to Shirburne, and in the end to Salisburie, unto which Bishopricke this place still belongeth. Heereby falleth Ladden a small water into the Tamis, and not farre off standeth Laurents Wal∣tham, where are to be seene the foote foundations of an old fort, and divers Romane coines often times digged up; and next to it Billingsbere the inhabitation of Sir Henry Nevill issued from the Lords Abergevenny. From Sunning the Tamis passeth by Bistleham, Bisham. now called short, Bisham, at first a Lordship of the Knights Templars, then of the Montacutes, and amongst them, William the first Earle of Salisburie of his familie founded a Priory, wherein, some say, hee was buried. Certes his wife the daughter of the Lord Grandison was buried there, and in the Inscription of her tombe it was specified, Grandison. that her father was descended out of Burgundie, cosin-ger∣man to the Emperour of Constantinople, the King of Hungary, and Duke of Baveire, and brought into England by Edmund Earle of Lancaster. Now is the possession of Sir Edward Hoby Knight, of me especially to be observed, whose singular kind∣nesse toward me the often consideration thereof shall keepe so fresh, that it shall ne∣ver vanish out of my remembrance. Tamis having now left Bisham behind it, fetcheth it selfe with a compasse about to a little towne named in the former ages Southe-alington afterward Maiden-hith, and at this day Maindenhead, of the superstitious worshipping of I wote not what British Maidens head, Maidenhead. one of those eleven thousand Virgins, who as they returned from Rome into their country with Vrsula their leader, suffered as Martyrs at Colein in Germanie, under that scourge of God, Attila ▪ Neither is this towne of any antiquity: for, no longer agoe then in our great Grandfathers daies, there was a Ferry in a place some∣what higher, at Babhams end. But after they had built heere a bridge of timber piles, it beganne to flourish with Innes, and goe beyond her mother Bray hard by, which notwithstanding is farre more ancient, as having given name to the whole Hundred. This parcell of the shire, I have beene of opinion that the BIBROCI, who yeelded themselves under Cesars protection, inhabited in times past: And why should I thinke otherwise? Bibroci. The reliques of them remaine yet most evidently in the name. For, BIBRACTE in France is now also drawen shorter into Bray: and not far from hence Caesar passed over the Tamis with his armie, as I will shew in due place, what time as the people of that small Canton put themselves to the devotion of Caesar. Certes, If a man should hunt for these Bibroci elsewhere, he should I beleeve, hardly find them. Within this Hundred of the Bray. Bibroci, Windesore beareth a goodly shew: in the Saxon tongue, Windesore. haply of the winding shore called for so it is named downe in the Charter of King Edward the Confessour, who in this forme of words made a grant unto the Monks of Westminster. To the praise of almighty God, I have granted as an endowment and a perpetuall Inheritance to the use and behoofe of those that serve the Lord, Windle-shore with the appurtenances. And I have read nothing more ancient, concerning Windsore. But the Monks had not long held it in possession, when William of Normandie by making an exchange drew it backe to himselfe. For in this tenure goeth his Charter. With the consent and favour of the venerable Ab∣bat of Westminster, I have made a composition for Windlesor to be the Kings possession, be∣cause that place seemed profitable and commodious by reason of water hard adjoyning to it: and the wood fit for game, & many other particulars lying there meet & necessary for Kings: yea, and a place very convenient to receive and entertaine the King: in lieu whereof I have granted to the Monks Wokendune and Ferings. Surely a Princes seat cannot lightly have a more pleasant site, For, from an high hill that riseth with a gentle ascent, it enjoyeth a most delightfull prospect round about. Fore-right in the Front it overlooketh a vale lying out farre and wide, garnished with corne-fields flourishing greene with medowes, decked with groves on either side, and watered with the most mild and calme river Tamis. Behind it a∣rise hils every where, neither rough nor over-high, attired, as it were with woods and even dedicated as one would say by nature to hunting game. With the pleasantnes of this place Princes were allured, very often to retire themselves hither: and heere was Edward the Third that most puissant King borne to conquer France: Order of the Garter. who heere built new out of the ground a most strong Castle in bignesse equall to a pretie Citie, forti∣fied with ditches and bulwarks made of stone: and forthwith after he had subdued the French and Scots, held at one and the selfe same time Iohn King of France, and David King of Scotland prisoners together in the same. This Castle is divided into courts: the inner more toward the East, containeth in it the Kings pallace, than which for the order and contriving, there can be no building more lightsome, nor more mag∣nificent. On the north side, where it looketh downe to the river, Q. Elizabeth adjoy∣ned a most pleasant Terrace, or open walking place. The utter base court hath at the very first entrance a most stately Church consecrated by King Edward the Third un∣to the blessed Virgine Marie and to Saint George of Cappadocia: but brought unto that sumptuous magnificence, which now we see it carrie, by King Edward the fourth, and Sir Reginald Bray. In this place, king Edward the third, for to adorne martiall prowesse, with honors, the guerdon of vertue, ordained that most noble order and society of Knights, whom (as some report) for his owne garter given forth as signall of a battaile that sped for∣tunately, hee called Knights of the Garter: who weare on their left legge somewhat under the knee a blew garter: carying this Impresse wrought with golden letters in French; HONY SOIT QVI MALYPENSE, and fasten the same with a buckle of gold as with the bond of a most inward society, in token of concord and unity, that there might bee among them a certaine consociation and communion of vertues. Shame to h that evill thinketh. But others there be, that doe attribute it unto the garter of the Queene, or rather of Ioan Countesse of Salisburie, a Lady of incomparable beauty, which fell from her as shee daunced, and the King tooke up from the floore: for, when a number of Nobles and Gentle men standing by laughed thereat, he made answere againe, that shortly it would come to passe that garter should be in high honour and estimation. This is the common and most received report: Neither need this seeme to be a base originall thereof, considering how, as one saith, Nobilitas sub amore jacet. Nobility lies under love. There be also, that would have the invention of this order to be much more anci∣ent, fathering it upon King Richard the first, and are verily perswaded, that King Ed∣ward at length brought it into use againe: but how truely, I know not. Yet in the verie booke of the first Institution, which William Dethicke Garter, principall King of armes, a Gentleman most studious in all such things as concerne Honour, shewed unto me, thus we read. Richardo cum contra Turcas & Agarenos, &c. that is, when K. Richard warred upon the Turkes and Saracens, Cypres and Acon, and was wearie of so lingring delay, whiles the siege continued long in wonderfull care & anxiety, at length upon a divine inspiration, by the comming in & apparition (as it was thought) of S. George, it came into his mind to draw upon the legs of certaine choise Knights of his a certaine Gar∣ter or tach of leather, such onely as he had then readie at hand, whereby they being distin∣guished, and put in minde of future glorie promised unto them, if they wonne the victorie, they might be stirred up, and provoked to performe their service bravely, and fight more va∣liantly: in imitation of the Romans, who had such varietie of Coronets, wherewith milita∣rie men for divers and sundry causes, were rewarded accordingly: to the end that by these instigations (as it were) cowardise being shaken of, the valour of mind and courage of heart might arise and shew it selfe more resolute. But upon what occasion soever it beganne, the mightiest Princes of Christendome, reputed it amongst their greatest honour to be chosen and admitted into this companie: and since the first institution thereof, there have been alreadie received, Soveraig and enrolled into this order, which consisteth of six and twentie Knights, two and twentie Kings, or thereabout, besides our Kings of England, who are named Soveraignes thereof: to speake nothing of Dukes, and o∣thers of most high calling, verie many. And here I am willing to set downe their names that were first chosen into this order, Founders of the Order. and be commonly called, the Founders of the Order: for, their renowne is not to be abolished, who in those daies for stowt courage, and warlike prowesse, had few or no peeres, and were in that regard advan∣ced to this honour. Edward the Third King of England. Edward his eldest Sonne, Prince of Wales. Henrie, Duke of Lancaster. Thomas, Earle of Warwicke. The Capdall de Buch. Ralph, Earle of Stafford. William de Monteacute Earle of Sarisbu∣rie. Roger Mortimer, Earle of March. Sir Iohn Lisle. Sir Bartholomew Burgwash. Sir Iohn Beauchampe. Sir Iohn Mohun. Sir Hugh Courtney. Sir Thomas Holland. Sir Iohn Grey. Sir Richard Fitz Simon. Sir Miles Stapleton. Sir Thomas Walle. Sir Hugh Wrothesley. Sir Neel Loring. Sir Iohn Chandos. Sir Iames Awdeley. Sir Otes Holland. Sir Henrie Eme. Sir Zanchet D'brigecourt. Sir Walter Pavely. On the left side of the Church, are the houses of the Custos, or Deane, and twelve Prebendaries. On the right side standeth an house, not unlike to the Graecians Pry∣taneum : wherein twelve aged militarie men, Gentlemen borne, are maintained: who wearing every day a red or skarlet kirtle, reaching down to there ankles, with an up∣per mantle of purple over it, Almes-Knights. are bound daily to be present at divine service, there to commend unto God in their prayers, the Knights of this Order. Betwixt the two Courts before said, there riseth up an high mount, on which is set a round tower: and hard by it ariseth another loftie tower, called Winchester tower, of William Wickham Bishop of Winchester, whom King Edward the Third made overseer of the worke, when he built the Castle. Some report, that the said Wickham, after he had built and finished this Tower, in a certaine inner wall, engraved these words, This made Wickham: Wickham his Apoph∣thegm. which maner of speech in the English tongue, that seldome maketh di∣stinction of cases, carrieth such a doubtfull construction, that uncertaine it is, whe∣ther he made these buildings, or the buildings made him. Hereof information was given to the King by some privie back-biters for to worke him a displeasure; and that in such termes, as if Wickham did arrogantly challenge to himselfe all the honour of the building. Which when the King tooke in verie evill part, and sharply rebuked him for it▪ he made this answer, That he had not arrogated, and ascribed to himselfe the praise of so sumptuous, and princely an aedifice, but accounted this building, and peece of worke to have beene the meanes of all his dignities and preferments: neither have I (quoth he) made this Castle, but this Castle hath made me, and from low estate raised me unto the Kings favour, unto wealth, and dignitie. Under the Castle toward the West and South, li∣eth the towne of good bignesse and populous withall, which from the time of King Edward the Third began to flourish: and the other which standeth farther of, and is now called, Old Windsore, fell by little and little to decay, In which, (whiles Wil∣liam the First raigned, as we read in his booke) there were an hundred Hages, or h uses, whereof two and twentie were Or, free. fquit from Gable, out of the rest there went thirtie shillings. No other memorable thing is here to be found, but Eton, which is hereto adjoy∣ned by a wooden bridge over the Tamis, and in it a faire Colledge, and a famous Schoole of good literature, Eaton. founded and built by King Henrie the Sixth: wherein, besides the Provost, Eight fellowes, and the singing Choristers, there are threescore Schollers, instructed in Grammar, and in due time preferred to the Universitie of Cambridge. But this towne and Colledge is in Buckingham-shire, and not in Bark∣shire: Now there remaineth nothing to say more of Windsore, but that there is an ho∣nourable family of Barons, surnamed of Windsore, who fetch their originall from Walter the son of Other, Castellan of Windsore in the time of K. William the First: from whom also master Robert Glover most studious, and skilfull in Heraldrie, and who in the company of Heralds, bare the title of Somerset, hath prooved, the Fitz-Giralds in Ireland, Earles of Kildare and Desmond to bee derived. Neither thinke much of your labour, Barons of Windsore. to runne over these verses of Windsore, taken out of the Poem, entituled, The marriage of Tame and Isis, and penned certaine yeeres past: wherein father Tamisis endevoureth to set forth, as well the dignity of the place, as the ma∣jestie of Queene Elizabeth, keeping her Court therein. I am Windesorae surgunt in culmina ripae Turrigera, celso lambentes vertice coelum. Quas ubi conspexit doctae gratatus Etonae, Quae fuit Orbilijs nimium subjecta plagosis; Caeruleum caput ille lavans, ita farier infit. Aerias moles, gradibus surgentia templa, Ferratos postes pinnas, vivaria, verè Perpetuo laetos campos, Zephiro{que} colono Florentes hortos, Regum cunabula, regum Auratos thalamos, Regum praeclara sepulchra, Et quaecun{que} refers: nunc Windesora referri Desine. Cappadocis quanquam sis clara Georgi Militia, procerum{que} cohors chlamydata nitenti Cincta periscelidi suras, te lumine tanto Illustret, tantis radijs perstringit & orbem, Vt jam Phryxeum spernat Burgundia vellus, Contemnat cochleis variatos Gallia torques, Et cruce conspicuas pallas, Rhodus, Alcala, & Elba, Sola{que} militiae sit splendida gloria vestrae; Desine mirari, latari desine tandem. Omnia concedunt uni, superatur in uno Quicquid habes: tibi major honos, & gloria surgit, Accola quod nostrae ripae sit, & incola vobis Elizabetha. (simul{que} suo quasi poplite flexo Tamisis en placide subsidet, & inde profatur) Elizabetha suis Diva & Dea sola Britannis: Cujus enexhaustas laudes si carmine nostro Complecti cuperem, Melibocco promptius Alpes Imponam, numerem{que} meas numerosus arenas. Si quasdam tacuisse velim, quamcun{que} tacebo Major exit; Primos actus, veteres{que} labores Prosequa ? ad sese revocant praesentia mentem. Iustitiam dicam? magis at Clementia splendet. Victrices referam vires? plus vicit inesmis. Quód pietas floret, quód non timet Anglia Martem, Quód legi nemo, quód lex dominatur & omni, Quód vicina truci non servit Scotia Gallo, Exuit at{que} suos sylvestris Hibernia mores, Criniger Vltonius, quod jam mitescere discit; Laus cadit haec illi, nil non debetar & illi. Crimina-quae pellunt, tanta quae principe dignae Omnes templa sacro posuerunt pectore Divae; Religio superos sancte manet esse colendos, Iustitia utilibus semper praeponere justum. Edocet, ut praeceps nil sit Prudentia suadet; Temperies ut casta velit, cupiat{que} pudica Instruit; immotam mentem Constantia firmat. Hinc EADEM SEMPER, rectè sibi vindicat illa. Proferet undos quis tantas carmine landes? Sola tenet laudum quicquid numerabitis omnes. Sit faelix, valeat, vivat, laudetur, ametur; Dum mihi sunt fluctus, dum cursus, dum mihi ripae. Angligenum faelix Princeps moderetur habenas; Finiat una dies illi annos, & mihi cursus. And now the tour-supporting bankes, at Windsore mount on hie, That with their loftie-headed tops reach to the cloudy kie. Which when * he saw, and had withall greeted that learned Eaton, Where Masters too too rigorous, have schollers overbeaten. His Sea-like head he lifting up in this wise gan to say; Thy long discourse (O Windsor ) I wish thee now to stay, Of high rais'd mounts, of temples tall that rise with stately staire, Of yron-bound beames, of battlements, and pinnacles so faire: Of gamefull parks, of meadowes fresh, ay-spring-like pleasant fields, Of goodly gardens clad with flowers, that holesome Zephyrus yields, Of nurseries, gilt-marriage owers, and sumptuous tombes of Kings, Relate no more, but make an end of all such glorious things. What though thou much renowned be, by many a Georgian Knight, And Nobles clad in mantles rich, with costly garter dight, Doe cause thy name to shine so much, and thence to thy great praise Through out the world are spred abrode so bright and glittering raies, That Burgundie despiseth now his goodly Toison D'or, And France of colars gartrisht faire with cockles sets no store, Nor Rhodes, with Alcal and Elba, regard the robes with Crosse Sightly beset; so that they count their Orders all but drosse, Compar'd with Knighthood this of thine, which onely beares the name; Cease now to joy, cease now at length to wonder at the same. All yeeld to one, what ev'r thou hast in one is drowned all, For greater glorie grow's to thee, and honour more doth fall, In that there dwels upon my banke, and seated is in thee, Elizabeth (and therewith Tamis seeming to bow his knee, Queene Eli∣zabeth. And gently crouch, obeisance made, and then he thus went on) Elizabeth, of Englishmen sole Goddesse, Saint alone. Whose praise-worth vertues, if in verse I now should take in hand For to comprize, on Meliboc an hill that high doth stand, I might as easily set the Alps, or number all my sand. If some I would in silence passe, what ever I suppresse, Will greater proove than all the rest: If I my selfe addresse, Her formost acts, and travailes old to count, I then shall find, That those of present times, to them will draw away my mind. Say, that of justice I relate; more shin's her mercies lore; Speake I of her victorious armes; unarm'd she gained more. That piety now flourisheth, that England feares no warre, That none rules law, but unto law all men obedient are, That neighbour Scots be not enthral'd to Frenchmen rigorous, That Irish wild doe now cast of their fashions barbarous, That shag-hai'rd Ulster Kern, doth learne civility anew, The praise and thanks is hers alone. What is not to her due: Those Goddesses that vices chase, and are beseeming best A Prince so rare, are seated all, and shrined in her brest. Religion First, puts her in mind to worship God aright, And Iustice teacheth to preferre before all gaine, the right. Prudence adviseth naught to doe rashly without fore-cast. Then Temperance perswades to love all things both pure and chast. Queene Eli∣zabeths Mot, or Empresse. And Constancie her resolute mind doth settle firme and fast. Hence justly she, ALVVAYS THE SAME, claimes and keepes to the last. Who can discribe in Flowing or rolling. in waving verse such noble vertues all? Praise-worthy parts she hath alone, what all ye reckon shall. Then happinesse, long life and health, praise, love, may her betide, So long as waves of mine shall last, or streame and bankes abide; So long may shee, most blessed Prince, all Englands scepter sway, Let both my course, and her life end, in one and selfe-same day. The rest of Or, the . Barkshire which lieth Southward from Windsor, is shadowed with woods, and thickets, commonly called, the Forrest of Windlesor, in which the townes and villages stand but thinne (whereof Ockingham is of greatest name, Windsor Forrest. Chases or Forrests. Forrest, what it is, and whence so called. by reason of the bignesse thereof, and trade of clothing:) but very full it is of game in everie place. Now, for as much as we have oftentimes made mention, and shall still, of the Forrests: what a Forrest is, and the reason of that name, if you desire to know, (but see you laugh not thereat) take it heere out of the blacke booke of the Exchequer. A Forrest is a safe harbor, and abiding place of deere or beasts, not of any whatsoever, but of wilde, and such as delight in woods: not in every place, but in some certaine and meet for that purpose, and hereupon a forrest hath the name, as one would say, Feresta, that is, a station of wild beasts. And incredible it is how much ground the kings of England have uffered every where to lie untilled, and set a part for to empale & enclose such deere, or, as they use to say, have afforested. Neither can I think, that any thing else was the cause thereof, but onely the overmuch delight in hunting, or to maintaine the Kings houshold (although some attribute it to the infrequencie of the people to inhabit the countrey) seeing that since the Danes were heere, they for a long time afforested more and more, and for the maintenance, and keeping of such places ordained most straight lawes, Protoforesta∣rius. and an overseer, whom they cal, Protoforestarius, that is, Chiefe forrester, or Master of the Forrests, who should heare causes belonging unto Forrests, and punish either by death or losse of limb, whosoever killed Deere within any parke or chase. But Iohn of Sarisburie shal in his own words tell you these things briefely out of his Polycraticon; that which you may marvell more at, to lay grins for birds, to set snares to al∣lure them with nooze or pipe, or by any waies laying whatsoever to entrap or take them, is oftentimes by vertue of an Edict, made a crime, and either amerced with forfeiture of goods, or punished with losse of limbe and life. You have heard that the fowles of the aire, and fishes of the sea are common: But these ywis belong unto the King, which the Forrest Law taketh hold of, and claimeth wheresoever they flie. With-hold thy hand, forbeare and abstaine lest thou also bee punished for treason, fall into the hunters hand as a prey. Husband∣men are debarred their fallow fields whiles Deere have libertie to stray abroad, and that their pasture may bee augmented, the poore farmer is abridged, and cut short of his grounds. What is sowne, planted, or graffed, they keepe from the husbandmen that bee tenants: both pa∣sturage from heardmen, drovers and graziers, and Bee-hives they exclude from floury plots: yea, the very Bees themselves are scarcely permitted to use their naturall libertie. Which courses seeming too inhumane, were the occasion otherwhiles of great troubles and uproares, so long, untill in the end by the rising and revolt of the Barons, there was wrested from King Henry the third, the Charter de Foresta: wherin those rigorous laws being made void he granted others more indifferent, whereunto they are bound e∣ven at this day, Iustices of the Forrests. who dwell within compasse of the Forrests. And from that time, two Justices were appointed for these causes, whereof the one overseeth all Forrests on this side the river Trent, the other, all the rest beyond Trent as farre as Scotland, with great authoritie. Throughout all this Province or county (as wee find in the Survey booke of England,) The Kings Knight. The Taine or Kings Knight, holding of him as Lord, when∣soever he died, left unto the King for a reliefe all his armour, one horse with a saddle, and another without a saddle. And if he had either hounds or hawkes, they were tendred and presented unto the King, that hee might take them if he would. When Gelt was given in the time of King Edward [the Confessour] generally throughout all Barkshire, an Hide of Land yeilded three-pence halfe-penny before Christmas, and as much at Whitsontide. Thus much of Barkshire, which (as yet) hath given the title of Earle to no man. Within the compasse of this shire, are parishes. 140. THese Regions which hitherto we have travailed thorow, that is to say, of the Danmonij, Durotriges, Belgae, and Attrebatij ; what time as the Saxons bare Soveraigne rule in Britaine, The King∣dome of West-Saxons. fell to the Kingdome of the West-Saxons, which they in their language, called, , and themselves , of Cerdics Grandfa∣ther, who first erected this Kingdome. Geguises. Whence they were termed Gevissi, and by others also Visi-Saxones, from their West situati∣on, like as the Westerne Gothes, are named Visi-Gothi. These at the length in the best and flourishing time of the Empire, reduced the English Heptarchie into the Saxons Monarchie: which notwith∣standing afterward, through the lither cowardise of their Kings, quickly aged, and soone vanished. So that herein, that may bee verified which we daily see. The race or issue of the most valiant men, and noblest Families, like as the of-spring of plants, hath their springing up, their flowring and maturitie: and in the end begin to fade, and by little and little to die utterly. REGNI. N Ext unto the Attrebatii Eastward, called the people in Latine REGNI, by Ptolomee PHrNOI, inhabited those Regions which we at this day, doe commonly terme Surry, and South-sex, with the Sea-coast of Hant∣shire. As touching the Etymologie of this named, I will passe over my conceits in silence, because per ad∣venture they would carry no more truth with them, than if I should thinke they were by Ptolomey, PHrNOI, for that it was Regnum, that is, a Kingdome, and the Romans permitted the people thereof to remaine under a regall government. For, in this tract it was, that as Tacitus writeth, certaine Cities according to an old Custome of the people of Rome, were given to Cogidunus, a British King, that they might have even Kings also, as instruments to draw others into bondage and ser∣vitude. But this conjecture seemeth to my selfe not probable, and haply to others absurd, I utterly reject: and willingly embrace the Saxon ori∣ginal of these latter names: to wit, that South-sex, taketh denomina∣tion of the South-Saxons, and Suthrey of the South situation upon the River, Rhey. for, no man may denie, that Suth-rey importeth so much, considering that Over-rhey, in the old English tongue, signifieth, Over, or beyond the river. SVTH-REY. S VRRIA, which Bede nameth Suthriona, commonly called Suthrey, and Surrey, and by the Saxons, of bordering South (upon the river, , for , with them betokeneth the South, and a river or floud) from the West, boundeth partly upon Barkshire and Hantshire, from the South upon Sus∣sex: and from the East on Kent: toward the North it is wate∣red with the River Tamis, and by it divided from Middlesex. A country it is not very large, yet wealthy enough, where it beareth upon Tamis, and lieth as a plaine and champion country: it yieldeth corne meetely wel, and forrage abundantly, especially towards the South, where a continu∣all valley falling lowe by little and little, called in times past Holmesdale of the woods therein, runneth downe very pleasant to behold, by reason of the delectable variety of groves, fields, and medowes. On each side there be prety hills rising up a great way along in the country, parkes every where replenished with Deere, rivers also full of fish: whereby it affordeth for pleasure faire game of hunting, and as delightsome fishing. Likened it is by some unto a course freeze garment with a green guard, or to a cloath of a great spinning and thin woven, with a greene list about it, for that the inner part is but baraine, the outward edge or skirt more fertill. In my perambulation through this shire, I will follow the Tamis and the rivers running into it as guides of my journey: so shall I be sure to omit no memorable thing, seeing that the places which are of greater marke and antiquitie doe all a-butte upon these rivers. Chertsey. The Tamis (that we may follow his course with the streame, as it runneth downe) so soone as hee hath taken his leave of Barkshire passeth hard by Chertsey, which Beda calleth the Isle of Cerotus. Now scarce halfe an Island, unlesse it bee by winter waters: wherein, as in a place severed from all intercourse and commerce with men, Frithwald, as he calleth himselfe in the charter of the foundation, a petty Prince or Regent of the Province of Surrey, under Woilpher King of the Mercians, and Erken∣wald Bishop of London in the first rising of the English primitive Church, founded a little monasterie, 666. wherein for a time that most devout King Henry the sixt lay inter∣red, whom, Henry the sixth. being deposed from his Regal dignitie, the house of Yorke to establish their kingdome securely, deprived also of his life, and here without any honour, buri∣ed him. But King Henry the Seventh afterwards having translated his body to Windsor, and bestowed it in a new tombe, solemnized his funeralls after a princely manner, and so much admired his Godly and holy vertues (for, hee was the lively patterne of Christian piety and patience) that he dealt with Pope Iulius, to have him made a Saint. But the reason why this tooke no effect was the Popes covetousnesse, who demanded too great a summe of money for a Kings Canonization, as they terme it, Histor. of Canterburie. so that hee might seeme ready to grant those kind of honours not for the Princes holinesse sake, but for gold. A little beneath this, the river Wey run∣neth into Tamis, which flowing forth out of Hantshire, so soone as it is come into Suthrey visiteth Feornham, Farnham. commonly termed Farnham, so named of much ferne growing in that place: which Ethelbald King of the West Saxons to use his owne words Gave unto the Bishop and Congrega∣tion. Congregation of Winchester Church. Here, about the yeare of our Lord 893. King Elfred with a small power put to flight the Danes as they spoiled and harried the country: and afterwards when King Stephen, had granted leave to as many as sided with him to build Castles, Henry of Bloys brother to King Stephen erected a spacious Castle upon an hill that overtop∣ped the towne: which being a place of refuge for rebellious and seditious persons, King Henry the Third cast it downe: howbeit the Bishops of Winchester, un∣to whom it belonged built it up againe. And not farre from hence, at Waverley, SVRREY Olim Sedes REGNORVAL William Giffard Bishop of Winchester founded an Abbey for Monkes of the Cister∣cian order commonly called, Waverley. White Monkes. * Which Abbey being a grand child as they termed it from Cisterce in Burgundy, was so fruitfull here in England that it was mother to the Abbeies of Gerondon, Ford, Tame, Cumb, and grandmother to Bordesley, Bidlesden, Bruer, Bindon, and Dunkeswell. For so religious orders were wont to keepe in pedegree manner the propagation of their Orders, as a deduction of Co∣lonies out of them. From thence, Wey holding on his course by Godelming, which King Elfred bequeathed unto Ethelwald his brothers sonne, Cateshull. not farre from the Manour of Cateshull, which Hamon of Gatton held to bee the Mareshall of har∣lots when the King came into those parts: Guildford. not farre from Loseley, where wee saw a large faire house belonging to the family of the Mores, knights, within a parke; it commeth to Guilford, in the Saxon tongue , and in some copies, writ∣ten Gegldford. A mercate towne it is now well frequented, and full of faire Innes, but in old time it was a royall mansion of the English Saxon Kings, which also that noble Ethelwald held as a legacie from his Uncle by the fathers side. The King hath now thereby a decaying house, and not farre from the river are to be seene the bro∣ken walles of an old large Castle. But in the midst of the towne there is a Church, the west end whereof made of arched worke, and embowed over head seemeth to bee very ancient. Haga. Heere, as it is to bee seene in William the first his booke, the King had seventy five Hages, that is, houses, wherein remained one hundred seventy and five men. But for nothing it is so famous, as for the treacherie, and crueltie of Goodwin Earle of Kent, who in the yeare of Christ 1036. When Elfrid King Etheldreds son, and heire apparent to the Crowne of England came out of Normandie to claime his right, entertained him with faithfull promise of safety, but forthwith hardly en∣treated him contrary to his word: Decimation. For, sodainly in the dead of the night, hee surpri∣sed and put to death in this place sixe hundred Normans, who had accompanied the young Prince, by tithing them, as our Writers report. Neither slew hee every tenth man of them drawne by lot according to the old militarie custome, but even as hee had killed nine, he let the tenth man goe by: and even these tenth men thus reserved hee went over againe, and most cruelly retithed them. As for Elfred himselfe hee delivered him into the hands of Harold the Dane, who after hee had pulled both eies out of his head, over-layed him with irons, and kept him in close prison, even unto his dying day. Wey beeing passed from hence with a long course Northward, Oking, or Woking. sheweth nothing memorable besides Sutton, the residence of the Westons an ancient family of Knights degree bettered by an heire of T. Camel, Oking, where King Henry the seventh repaired and enlarged the Manour house beeing the inheritance of the La∣dy Margaret Countesse of Richmont his mother, who lived there in her later time, Newark sometime a small Priory invironed with divided streames: Pyriford, where in our remembrance Edward Earle of Lincolne Lord Clinton, and Admirall of Eng∣land built him an house; and Ockham hard by, where that great Philosopher and fa∣ther of the Nominals William de Ockham was borne and whereof hee tooke that name: William Ockham. as of the next village Ripley, G. de Ripley a ring leader of our Alchimists, and a mysticall impostor. But where this Wey is discharged into Tamis at a double mouth, Pater No ∣nalium. Otelands a proper house of the Kings offereth it selfe to bee seene within a parke: neere unto which, Caesar passed over Tamis into the borders of Cassivelan∣nus. For, Where Cae crossed the Tamis. this was the onely place where a man might in times past goe over the Tamis on foote and that hardly too, which the Britaines themselves improvident∣ly bewraied unto Caesar. For, on the other side of the river, there was a great power of the Britaines well appointed and in readinesse: and the very banke it selfe was fenced with sharpe stakes fastned affront against the enemie, and others of the same sort pitched downe in the channell, stucke covered with the river. The tokens where∣of, saith Beda, Are seene this day, and it seemeth to the beholders that every one of them carrying the thicknesse of a mans thigh and covered over with lead, stucke unmoveable, as being driven hard into the bottome of the river. But the Romans entred the river with such force, when the water reached up to their verie chinnes, that the Britaines could not abide their violence, but left the banke and betooke themselves to flight. In this thing, I cannot bee deceived, considering that the river heere is scarce sixe foote deepe, Coway-stakes. the place at this day of those stakes is called Coway-stakes, and Caesar maketh the borders of Cassivelanus where hee setteth downe his passage over the river to be about fourescore Italian miles from the sea which beateth upon the East-coast of Kent, where he landed: and at the very same distance is this passage of ours. The river Mole. Within some few miles from thence the river Mole, having from the South side passed through the whole country, hasteneth to joyne with the Tamis ; but at length beeing letted by overthwart hils, maketh himselfe a way under the ground in man∣ner of mouldwarpe, like unto that famous river Anas in Spaine: whereof it may seeme it tooke name, Anas a river in Spaine. seeing that creature living within the ground, is called also in Eng∣lish a Mole. But upon this river, there is not any thing of note, save onely a good way off from the spring and head of it, and neere unto an old port way of the Romans making which men call Stanystreet ) there stands the towne Aclea, commonly Ockley : Ockley. so-named of Okes where Ethelwolph the sonne of Egbert, who having beene professeed in the holy Orders and released by the Popes authority, when hee had possession of his fathers kingdome by right of inheritance, joyned battaile with the Danes, fought with good successe, and slew all the valiantest men amongst them: Yet did hee little, or no good to his native country, the Danes evermore renewing their forces still as they were overthrowne, like unto that serpent Hydra. A little from the fountaines where this river springeth, standeth Gatton which now is scarce a small village, Gatton. though in times past it hath beene a famous towne. To prove the antiquitie thereof, it sheweth Roman coines dig∣ged forth of the ground, and sendeth unto the Parliament two Burgesses. Lower than it, Rhie-gate. is seated Rhie-gat, (which if a man interpret according to our ancient lan∣guage, is as much as the Rivers course ), in a vale running out farre into the East, called Holmesdale ; Holmesdale. the Inhabitants whereof, for that once or twice they vanqui∣shed the Danes as they wasted the country, are wont in their owne praise to chaunt this Rythme. The vale of Holmesdall, Never wonne, ne never shall. This Rhie-gate carrying a greater shew for largenesse than faire buildings, hath on the South-side a Parke thicke sette with faire groves, wherein the right Noble Charles, Earle of Nottingham, Baron of Effingham, and Lord Admirall of England, hath a house; where the Earles of Warren and Southrey had founded a prety Mona∣sterie. On the East side, standeth a Castle mounted aloft, now forlorne and for age ready to fall; built by the same Earles and of the vale wherein it standeth, commonly called Holmecastle: Holmecastle. under which I saw a wonderfull vault carried under the ground of arch-worke over head, hollowed with great labour out of a soft gritte and crombling stone, such as the whole hill standeth of. These Earles of War∣ren, as wee finde in the Offices or inquisitions held it in chiefe of the King Or Inquisi∣tions. in their Baronie, In Baronia sua de Conquesta Angliae. from the conquest of England. Hence runneth this river downe by Bech∣worth Castle, for which Sir Thomas Browne obtained of King Henry the Sixth the libertie of holding a Faire. For it is the habitation of the Brownes, Knights: out of which family since our grand-father can remember, when Sir Anthony Browne had married Lady Lucie the fourth daughter of Iohn Nevil Marquesse Mont-a-cute, Queene Mary honoured his sonnes sonne with the title of Vicount Mont-a-cute. Some few miles from hence Westward Effingham sheweth it selfe, Effingham. the posses∣sion not long since of William Howard (son to that Noble Thomas Duke of Norfolke that triumphed over the Scots) who being created by Queene Mary Baron Howard of Effingham, & made Lord High-Admirall of England, was first Lord Chamberlain unto Queene Elizabeth of most happy memorie, and then Lord privie Seale: whose sonne Charles now flourisheth, Lord great Admirall of England, whom in the yeare of our Lord 1597. the same Queene Elizabeth honoured also with the title of Earle of Nottingham, of whom more in my Annales, but now returne we to the river. The Mole now being come as farre as Whitehill, whereon the Box tree groweth in great plenty, The Swallow, or Swallow hole. at the foote thereof hideth himselfe, or rather is swallowed up, and thereof the place is called the Swallow: but after a mile or two neere unto Letherhed bridge boyling up and breaking forth, taketh joy to spring out againe. So that the Inhabitants of this tract may boast as well as the Spaniards, A bridge on which flockes of sheepe are pastured. that they have a bridge which feedeth many flockes of sheepe: For, this is a common by-word, most rife in the Spaniards mouthes, as touching the place where their river Anas, now called Guadiana, hideth himselfe for ten miles together. Thus our Mole rising up a fresh hasteneth faire and softly by Stoke Dabernoun so named of the ancient possessors the Dabernouns gentlemen of great good note, afterward by inheritance from them the possession of the Lord Bray; L. Bray. and by Aesher sometimes a retyring place belonging to the Bishops of Winchester. And then very neare Molesey whereunto it giveth name, sheddeth himselfe into the Tamis. After Tamis hath taken unto him the Mole, hee carrieth his streame Northwardly and runneth fast by Kingstone, called in times past Moreford, as some will have it; a ve∣ry good mercate towne for the bignesse, and well frequented; well knowne also in old time by reason of a Castle there belonging to the Clares Earles of Glocester. Which towne had beginning from a little towne more ancient then it of the same name, standing upon a flat ground and subject to the inundation of Tamis. In which when England was almost ruinated by the Danish warres, Athelstan, Edwin, and Ethel∣dred were crowned Kings upon an open stage in the Market place, and of these Kings heere crowned, it came to be named Kingstone, as one would say, The Kings Towne. Tamis now turning his course directly Northward, visiteth another place: which the Kings chose for themselves sometimes to sojourne at, which of the shining brightnesse they call Shene: Richmond. Both the place and the village before the time of King Henry the Seventh called Shene. but now it is named Richmond, wherein, the most mighty Prince, King Edward the Third when he had lived sufficiently both to glory and nature, di∣ed; with sorrow that hee conceived for the death of that most valiant and Martiall prince his sonne, which sorrow pierced so deepe, and stucke so neere him and all England beside, that it farre exceeded all comfort. And verily at this time if ever else, England had a good cause to grieve: For, within one yeare after, it lost the true praise of military prowesse and of accomplished vertue: Edward the Third. For, both of them by bea∣ring their victorious armes throughout all France, struke so great a terrour where∣soever they came, that as the father might most worthily with King Antiochus car∣rie the name of Thunder-bolt, so his sonne with Pyrrhus deserved to bee named the Eagle. Heere also departed Anne wife to King Richard the Second, sister of the Em∣perour Wenzelaus, and daughter to the Emperour Charles the fourth, who first taught English women the manner of sitting on horsebacke which now is used: whereas be∣fore time, they rode very unseemely astride, like as men doe. Whose death also her passionate husband tooke so to the heart, that he altogether neglected the said house, and could not abide it. Howbeit King Henry the Fifth readorned it with new buildings, and in Shene a pretty village hard by, he joyned thereto a little religious house of Carthusian Monks, which he called, The house of Iesu of Bethelem. But in the raigne of Henry the seventh, this Princely place was with a woefull sudden fire consumed almost to ashes; How∣beit rising up againe forthwith farre more beautifull and glorious as it were a Phae∣nix out of her owne ashes, by the meanes of the same King Henry: it tooke this new name Richmond, of the title hee bare, being Earle of Richmond, before he obtained the Crowne of England. Scarce had that Noble King Henry the Seventh finished this new worke, when in this place he yeilded unto nature, and ended his life; through whose care, vigilancy, policy, and forecasting wisedome for time to come, the State and common-weale of England hath to this day stood established and invincible. From hence likewise his sonnes daughter Queene Elizabeth a most gracious Ladie ninetie and foure yeares after, having lived fully to the contentment of nature, (For, 70. yeare old she was or much thereabout) when it pleased God to call her out of this world, was received into the sacred and coelestiall society. A Prince above her ex of manly courage, The death of Queene Eli∣zabeth 1603. and high conceit, who lively resembled as well the royall qualities of her Grandfather, as she did his princely presence and countenance, the Worlds love, and joy of Britaine. And so farre was she, a woman though shee were, from degenerating and growing unlike her noble Progenitors in that continued course of their vertues, that if she surmounted them not, surely she equalled them to the full. Well, posteritie may one day hereafter be so thankefull as to yield heereto a gracious credit (neither doe I heere by way of flatterie set a false colour and glosse upon the truth) that a Virgin for the space of fortie foure yeares, so ruled the royall Scepter, as that her subjects loved her, enemies feared her, and every one with ad∣miration honored her, a thing in all foregoing ages of rare example. For, whose death England throughout, running all to teares, amid mones, and grones should have lien forlorne in most piteous case comfortlesse, had not presently upon her de∣parture out of this world, the most mild and gracious King Iames (on whom as the true and undoubted heire to her Crowne all mens minds were set, and eies fixed) with his sacred and bright beames shone unto us, and thereby put us into most comfortable hope of endlesse joy. Whom so long as we behold heere, wee beleeve not that shee is deceased. And why should we once say that she is deceased? whose vertues live still immortall, and the memoriall of whose name consecrated in mens hearts, and in eternitie of times, shall survive for ever. How farre the Tamis ebbeth and floweth. Thus farre swelleth the Tamis with the accesse of the flowing tide of the sea, a∣bout lx. Italian miles by water from his mouth. Neither to my knowledge is there any other river in all Europe, that for so many miles within land feeleth the violence of the Ocean forcing and rushing in upon it, and so driving backe and with-holding his waters, to the exceeding great commodity of the inhabitants bordering there∣upon. Why Tamis ebbeth and floweth so far within Land. Whither this commeth by reason that from hence he hath in manner no croo∣ked turnings and winding reaches, but with a more streight and direct channell carri∣eth his currant into the East, as being for the most part restrained, and kept in with higher bankes, and dilating himselfe with a wider mouth than all other rivers, lyeth more exposed and open to the Ocean, which by that most swift whirling about of the coelestiall Spheres from East to West is forceably driven and carried that way (as sometimes I have beene of opinion) let Philosophers discusse, unto whom I wil∣lingly leave these matters and such like to handle. Yet some few verses as touching these places and this argument, have heere out of the Marriage betweene Tame and Isis, if haply they may content your taste: A dextra, nobis Richmondia, Shena vetustis Celsa nitet, sapiens namque hanc Richmondia dici Henricus voluit, sibi quod retulisset honorem Et titulos Comitis Richmondia jure paterno: Hectoris Edwardi sed deflet funera nostri; Proh dolor! hîc illi regimens libera cessit Corpore contempto, sedes aditura supernas. Quem si non subito rapuissent ferrea fata, Aut te Valesiis rapuisset Gallia victor, Aut tibi Valesios. Then on the right hand Richmond stands, a faire and stately thing, So cal'd of us, (but Shene of old) which name that prudent King The seventh. Henry it gave, because to him it brought in fathers right The Honor and the Stile, whereby, he Earle of Richmond hight. But it of The Third. Edward King ( halas ) our Hector, wailes the death, Whose soule here freed from body which it scorn'd, with vitall breath, Departed hence right willingly, in heaven to live for ay: Whom had not cruell-sudden death untimely fetcht away, He would by sword have thee bereft, O France, of Valois line, Or them of thee. And after a few verses set betweene, Tamisis alternum sentit reditumque, fugamque Huc reflui pelagi, quoties vaga Cynthia pronos Octavâ librat coeli statione jugales. Aut tenet oppositam varianti lumine plagam, Plenior increscit celeremque recurrit in aestum: Atque superbus ait, concedant flumina nobis, Nulla per Europae dotatas nomine terras Flumina, tam longè sic certis legibus undas Alternas renovant, nisi fratres Scaldis, & Albis. Tamis heere by turnes alternative doth feele both ebbe, and flow Of Sea, by course of wandring Moone that rules tide heere below. As oft as she with each eight point of heaven above doth meete, Or holds the points full opposit, as lights doe change and fleete. He growes more full, and sooner hath recourse to flowing tide: And then in pride of heart he saith. All rivers else beside Vaile unto me. No streame so farre through Europe keepes againe His tide so just, unlesse the Scheld, and Elb my brethren twaine. About foure miles from the Tamis within the Country, None-such. Nonesuch a retiring place of the Princes putteth downe, and surpasseth all other houses round about: which, the most magnificent Prince King Henry the Eighth, in a very healthfull place called Cuddington before, selected for his owne delight and ease, and built with so great sumptuousnesse and rare workemanship, that it aspireth to the very top of ostentation for shew; so as a man may thinke, that all the skill of Architecture is in this one piece of worke bestowed, and heaped up together. So many statues, and lively images there are in every place, so many wonders of absolute workeman∣ship, and workes seeming to contend with Romane antiquities, that most worthily it may have, and maintaine still this name that it hath of [ Nonesuch ] according as Le∣land hath written of it: Hanc quia non habeant similem laudare Britanni Saepè solent, Nulli{que} parem, cognomine dicunt. The Britans oft are wont to praise this place, For that through all The Realme they cannot shew the like, and Nonesuch they it call. As for the very house selfe, so invironed it is about with Parkes full of Deere, such daintie gardens and delicate orchards it hath, such groves adorned with curi∣ous Arbors, so pretty quarters, beds, and Alleys, such walkes so shadowed with trees, that Amenitie or Pleasantnesse it selfe may seeme to have chosen no other place but it: where she might dwell together with healthfulnesse. Yet Queene Mary made it over to Henry Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell for other Lands: and he, when he had enlarged it with a Librarie passing well furnished, and other new buildings, passed over all his right when he died to the L. Lumley, who for his part spared no cost, that it might be truely answerable to the name: and from him now is it returned againe by compositions and conveiances to the Crowne. Neere hereunto (and worth the noting it is) there is a vaine of potters earth highly commended, and therefore the dearer sold, for the making of those crucibles and small vessels which Gold-smiths use in melting their gold. Nor farre from hence the cleare rivelet Wandle in Latin Vandalis. Woodcote. Noviomagi Vandalis, so full of the best Trouts, issueth forth from his head neare Cashalton and Wodcot where by a tuft of trees upon an hill-top there are to bee seene manifest signes of a pretty towne, and diverse wels built of flint stones: Concerning the populousnesse and wealth whereof the neighbour Inhabitants report very much: This in my conceit was that Citie which Ptolomee called NOIOMAGVS, and the Emperour Antonine NOVIOMA∣GVS. Noviomagus. Neither neede wee to seeke from else where proofe heereof, but from the cor∣respondencie of distance. For as the old Itinerary noteth, it is ten miles from Lon∣don, and twenty eight from Vagmiacj now Maidston. Many a mile therefore went they out of the way that placed Noviomagus either at Buckingham, or at Guildford. This was a principall Citie of the REGNI not knowne to Marinus Tyrius a most ancient Geographer, whom Ptolomee taking upon him to censure, taxeth for that he had set NOVIOMAGVS of Britaine by Climate more North, and by account of miles more South than London. Croidon. Wandle while it is yet small receiveth his first increase by a rill springing at Croi∣don, in times past called Cradiden: which standeth under the hils is very well known, as well for the house of the Archbishops of Canterbury, unto whom it hath belong∣ed now this long time; as for Char-coles which the townesmen make good chaffer of: The inhabitants report, that in old time there stood an house of the Kings in the West part of the towne neere unto Haling, where the husbandmen dig up other∣whiles rubble stone, which house the Archbishops having received it by gift from the King, translated unto their owne neerer the river. And neere unto this, the right reverend father in God D. Iohn Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury of most praise worthy Memory in his pious affection founded and endowed with living a very faire Hospitall for the reliefe of poore people, and a schoole for the furtherance of lear∣ning. As for that sudden swelling water or Bourne which the common people re∣port, to breake forth heere out of the ground, presaging, I wote not how, either dearth of corne, or the pestilence, may seeme not worthy once the naming, and yet the events sometime ensuing hath procured it credit. Neere unto this place stands Beddington, Beddington. wherein is to be seene a very faire house beautified with a delightfull shew of right pleasant gardens and orchards, by Sir Francis Carew Knight: For, the anci∣ent seat it is of the Carews, who being descended from the Carews of Moulesford (of whom also are come the Carews of Devonshire) have for a long time flourished in this country: but especially since Sir Iames Carew matched in marriage with the daughter and one of the coheires of the Baron Hoo and Hastings. * To digresse a little from the river, Addington. Eastward from Croidon standeth Addington now the habitation of Sir Oliff Leigh wherby is to be seene the ruble of a Castle, of Sir Robert Agvilon, and from him of the Lords Bardolph, who held certaine lands here in fee by Serianty to find in the Kings kitchin at the Coronation one to make a dainty dish which they called Mapigernoun, and Dilgerunt. What that was I leave to the skilfull in anci∣ent Cookerie, and returne to the river. Wandle increased with Croidon water passing by Morden, divideth it selfe to water Merton, in the old English tongue , situate in a most fruitfull soile. Aguilon. A towne made famous in times past by the death of Kinulph King of the West Saxons who was by a Clito, that is, a Prince of the bloud, slaine here in a small cottage of an harlot upon whom hee was enamoured, and Clito himself by K. Kinulphs followers immediately stabbed, Merton. suffered condigne punishment for his disloyall treachery. Now it sheweth onely the ruines of a Monastery, that K. Henry the First founded for blacke Chanons by the procurement of Gilbert High Sheriffe of Surry in the yeare 1127. which was famous for the Statute of Merton en∣acted here in the 21. of King Henrie the Third, and also for Water de Merton foun∣der of Merton Colledge in Oxford borne and bred heere. Above Merton farther from the river is seated Wibandune, Wimbledon. now commonly Wimbledon: where, when over much prosperitie had hatched civill broiles among the English Saxons; after the Bri∣tish warres were now ceased; Ethelbert King of Kent struck up the first Alarme of ci∣vill warre against his owne country men: but Ceaulin King of the West Saxons dis∣comfited him in this place with a mightie great slaughter and losse of his men having slaine his principall leaders Oslan and Kneben, of whom peradventure that entrenched rampier or fort which wee have heere seene of a round forme, is called Bensbury for But now, the greatest ornament of this place is that goodly house so beautifull for building, and so delectable for faire prospect and right pleasant gardens, which Sir Thomas Cecill Knight, sonne to that most prudent Counsellour of State Lord Bur∣leygh, built in the yeare 1588. when the Spanish Armado made saile upon the coast of England. Wandle now after a few miles entreth the Tamis, Putney. See Earles of Essex. when it hath given name to Wandlesworth, betweene Putney the native soile of Thomas Cromwell one of the flowting-stocks of fortune, and Batersey, sometimes in the Saxon tongue called , and in latine Patricii Insula, that is, Patrickes Isle: and, which now we seeke, an house of the Kings termed Kennington, Kennington. whereunto the Kings of England in old time were wont to retire themselves, but now finde wee neither the name nor the rammell thereof. Lambith. Then, is there Lambith or Lomehith, that is to say, a Lomy or clayish rode, or hith, famous in former times for the death of Hardy-Cnute. Canutus the Hardie, King of England, who there amid his cups yielded up his vitall breath. For hee, beeing given wholly to banqueting and feasting, caused royall dinners foure times every day, (as Henry of Huntingdon, reporteth) to be served up for all his court, choosing rather to have his invited guests, to send away whole dishes untouched, than other commers unbidden to call for more viands to be upon his table. But now this place is of the greater name and more frequented by reason of the Archbi∣shop of Canterburie his palace. For, Baldwine Archbishop of Canterbury about the yeare of Christ 1183. having made an exchange with the Bishop of Ro∣chester, purchased a manour in this place wherein hee began to build a palace for himselfe and his successours: which they by little and little encreased. But when they went about to erect a collegiat Church heere also, good GOD, what posting was there to Rome with complaints and appeales, from the Monkes of Canterburie, how many fiery thunderbolts, menaces and censures were sent out from the Bishop of Rome against these Archbishops? For these Monkes were in bodily feare, least this would bee their utter undoing, and a prejudice unto them in the Elections of the Archbishops. Neither were these blustering stormes allaied, untill the said Church newly begunne was laid levell with the ground. Adjoyning hard to this, is the most famous mercate towne and place of trade, in all this shire which at this day they call, Southworke. The Burrough of Southwarke, in Saxon speech , which is the South∣worke or building; because it standeth South over against London, the Suburbs whereof it may seeme in some sort to bee▪ but so large it is and populous, that it gives place to few Cities of England, having beene as it were a corporation by it selfe, it had in our fathers daies Bayliffes, but in the reigne of King Edward the Sixth it was annexed to the Citie of London, and is at this day taken for a member as it were of it: and therefore, when wee are come to London, wee will speake more at large thereof. Beneath this Burrough, Barons Saint Iohn of Lag∣ham. the Tamis forsaketh Surry, the East bound whereof pas∣seth in a manner directly downe from hence Southward, neere unto Lagham, which had their Parliamentarie Barons called Saint Iohn de Lagham, in the reigne of Ed∣ward the First, whose Inheritance came at length by an heire generall to Iohn Leddi∣ard: and some-what lower in the very angle well neere, where it bendeth to South∣sex and Kent, stands Streborow Castle, the seate in ancient time of Lord Cob∣ham, who of it were called, Sterborow. of Sterborow: where the issue proceeding from the bodies of Iohn Cobham, Lord of Cobham and Cowling, and the daugh∣ter of Hugh Nevil, flourished a long time in glory and dignitie. For, Reginald Cob∣ham in King Edward the thirds daies being created Knight of the Garter, was Admi∣rall of the sea-coasts, Lord Borough or Burgh. from Tamis mouth West-ward. But Thomas the last male of that line wedded the Lady Anne, daughter to Humfrey the Duke of Buckingham, of whom he begat one onely daughter named Anne, married unto Edward Burgh, who derived his pedigree from the Percies, and Earles of Athole: whose sonne Tho∣mas made by King Henry the Eighth Baron Burgh, left a sonne behind him named William. And his sonne Thomas a great favourer of learning, and Lord Governour of Briell, Queeene Elizabeth made Knight of the Garter, and Lord Deputy of Ireland, where hee honourably ended his life, pursuing the rebels. As touching Dame Eleanor Cobham descended out of this family, the wife of Humfrey Duke of Gloce∣ster, whose reputation had a flawe, I referre you to the English Historie, if you please. Now are wee to reckon up the Earles of this shire, William Rufus King of Eng∣land made William de Warrena, Earles of Sur∣rie, who also are called Earles of Warren. who had married his sister, the first Earle of Surrey▪ For in that Charter of his, by which hee founded the Priory of Lewis, thus wee read: Donavi, &c. that is, I have given and granted, &c. For the life and health of my Lord King William who brought mee into England, and for the health of my Lady Queene Mawd, my wives mother: and for the life and health of my Lord King William her sonne, after whose comming into England I made this charter, who also created me Earle of Surry, &c. whose sonne William succeeded and married the daughter of Hugh Earle of Ver∣mandois, whereupon his posteritie (as some suppose) used the Armes of Vermandois, vz. Chequy Or and Azure. His sonne VVilliam dying in the Holy-land about the yeare 1148. had issue, a daughter onely, who adorned first William, King Stephens sonne, and afterward Hamelin the base sonne of Gefferey Plantagenet Earle of Anjou, both her husbands, with the same title. But whereas her former husband died with∣out issue, William her sonne by Hamelin was Earle of Surry, whose posterie assu∣ming unto them the name of Warrens bare the same title. This William espoused the eldest daughter, and a coheire of William Marescall Earle of Pembroch, the widow of Hugh Bigod, Earles of March in France. who bare unto him Iohn, who slew Alan de la Zouch, in presence of the Judges of the Realme. This Iohn, of Alice the daughter of Hugh le Brune, halfe sister by the mothers side of King Henry the third, begat William, who died be∣fore his father: and hee of Ioan Vere the Earle of Oxfords daughter begat Iohn Posthumus, borne after his decease, and the last Earle of this house, who was stiled, as I have seene in the circumscription of his seale, Earle of Warren, of Surry and of Strathern in Scotland, Lord of Bromfield and of Yale, and Count-palatine. But hee dy∣ing without lawfull issue in the twelfth yeare of Edward the thirds raigne, Alice his sister and heire wedded unto Edmund Earle of Arundell, by her marriage brought this honour of Surrey into the house of Arundells. For Richard their sonne who married in the house of Lancaster (after his father was wickedly be∣headed for siding with his Soveraigne King Edward the Second, by the malignant envie of the Queene) was both Earle of Arundell and Surrey, and left both Earle∣domes to Richard his sonne, who contrary-wise lost his head for siding against his so∣veraigne King Richard the Second. But, Thomas his sonne, to repaire his fathers dishonour, lost his life for his Prince and country in France leaving his sisters his heires for the lands not entailed, who were married to Thomas Mowbraie Duke of Norfolke, &c. to Sir Powland Lenthall, and Sir William Beauchampe, Lord of Aber∣geveny. After by the Mowbraies, the title of Surrey, came at length to the Howards. Howbeit, in the meane while after the execution of Richard Earle of Arundell, King Richard the Second bestowed the title of Duke of Surry upon Thomas Hol∣land Earle of Kent, which honour he enjoyed not long; For, while hee combined with others, by privie conspiracies to restore the same King Richard to his liber∣tie and kingdome, the conspiracie was not carried so secretly, but contrary to his expectation brake forth and came to light: then fled hee, and by the people of Cirencester was intercepted and cut shorter by the head. After him Thomas Beaufort, Chancellour to the King, (if we give credit to Thomas Walsingham ) bare this dignity. For, in the yeare of our Lord (as hee saith) 1410. The Lord Tho∣mas Beaufort Earle of Surrey left this world. Now, let Walsingham in this point make good that which he writeth: for, in the Kings Records there is no such thing found, but onely this, that Thomas Beaufort about that time was made Lord Chancellour. But certaine it is, and that out of the Records of the King∣dome, that King Henry the Sixth, in the nine and twentie yeare of his raigne, created Iohn Mowbray, the sonne of Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Earle Warren and of Surry. And Richard second sonne of King Edward the Fourth having married the heire of Mowbray, received all the titles due to the Mowbraies by creation from his father. Afterward King Richard the Third, having dispatched the said Ri∣chard and by impious cruell meanes usurped the kingdome, that hee might by his benefits oblige unto him the house of the Howards, created in one, and the same day Iohn Lord Howard, Duke of Norfolke as next cosin and heire to the Mowbraies and his sonne Thomas, Earle of Surrie: in whose of-spring this honour hath ever since beene resplendent, and so continueth at this day. This County hath in it Parish Churches. 140. SVSSEX. V Nder Suth-rey toward the South lieth stretched out in a great length Suth-sex, which also in times past the Regni inhabited, in the Saxon tongue called , & at this day Sussex, which is as much to say, as the Region of the South Saxons, a word compounded of the site thereof Southward, and of the Saxons who in their Heptarchie placed here the second kingdome. It li∣eth upon the British Ocean all Southward with a streight shore (as it were) farre more in length than bredth: Howbeit it hath few harbours, by reason that the sea is dangerous for shelves, and therefore rough, and troublous, the shore al∣so it selfe full of rocks, and the South-west wind doth tyrannize thereon, casting up beach infinitely. The sea coast of this countrie, hath greene hils on it mounting to a greater height, Downes. called the Downes, which because they stand upon a fat chalke or kinde of marle yeeldeth corne aboundantly. The middle tract, garnished with medowes, pastures, corne-fields, and groves, maketh a very lovely shew. The hithermore and Northern side thereof, is shaded most pleasantly with woods, Anderida wood. like as in times past the whole country throughout, which by reason of the woods was hardly passable. For, the wood Andradswald, in the British language Coid Andred, taking the name of Anderida the City next, adjoyning, tooke up in this quarter, a hundred and twentie miles in length, and thirtie in bredth; memorable for the death of Sigebert King of West Saxons, who being de∣posed from his royall throne, was in this place stabbed by a Swineheard, and so died. Many pretty rivers it hath, but such as springing out of the North-side of the shire forthwith take their course to the Ocean, and therefore not able to beare any vessell of burden. Iron. Full of iron mines it is in sundry places, where for the making and fining whereof, there bee furnaces on every side, and a huge deale of wood is yearely spent, to which purpose divers brookes in many places are brought to runne in one channell, and sun∣dry medowes turned into pooles and waters, that they might bee of power sufficient to drive hammer milles, which beating upon the iron, resound all over the places ad∣joyning. And yet the iron here wrought, is not in every place of like goodnesse, but generally more brittle than is the Spanish iron, whether it be by the nature, or tincture and temper thereof. Howbeit, commodious enough to the iron Maisters who cast much great ordnance thereof, and other things to their no small gaine: Now whe∣ther it bee as gainefull and profitable to the common-wealth may bee doubted, but the age ensuing will bee better able to tell you. Neither want here glasse-houses, but the Glasse there made, Glasses. by reason of the matter or making, I wot not whether, is likewise nothing so pure and cleare, and therefore used of the common sort onely. This whole region throughout, after the civill manner of partition is divided in∣to sixe parts, which by a peculiar name they call Rapes, to wit, of Chichester, Arundel, Brembre, Lewis, Pevensey and Hastings, every of which beside their hundreds, hath a castle, river, and forrest of their owne. But for as much as the limits within which they are bounded bee not so well knowne unto mee, I am determined to take my way along the shore from West to East. For, the inner parts besprinkled with villages, Boseham. have in manner nothing therein worth relation. In the very confines of Hantshire and this county, standeth Bosenham, commonly called Boseham, a place environed round about with woods and the sea together; where (as Bede saith) Di∣cul the Scotish Monke had a verie small Cell, and in it, five or sixe religious men living poorely, in service of the Lord, which many yeeres after was converted into a rety∣ring place of ease, for King Harold. Whence hee when upon a time for his recrea∣tion, SVSSEXIA Siue Southsex. olim pars. REGNORVM. hee made out with a little barke into the maine sea, was with a contrary pirrie carried violently into Normandie, and there detained in hold, until he had by oth as∣sured the Kingdome of England unto William of Normandie, after the death of King Edward the Confessor. Whereby he presently drew upon himselfe his owne ru∣ine and upon England the danger of finall destruction. But, with what a crafty Am∣phibolie or Aequivocation, that subtill and captious catcher of syllables Goodwin Earle of Kent this Harolds father, Earle Good∣win doth aequivocate. caught this place, and how with a wily word-trap, hee deceived the Archbishop of Canterburie, Walter Mapaeus, who lived not many yeares after shall out of his booke entituled Of Courters toies tell you in his owne verie words. This Boseam underneath Chichester, saith hee, Goodwin saw and had a minde to it: beeing accompanied therefore with a great traine of Gentlemen, hee comes smiling and jesting unto the Archbishop of Canterburie, whose towne then it was, My Lord, saith he, Give you mee Alluding happily to Basium, that i a Busse, which was in times past used, in doing ho∣mage. Boseam? The Archbishop mervailing much what hee demaunded by that question: I give you, answered, Boseam▪ Then he forthwith, with that company of his Knights and Souldiours, fell downe, (as he had before taken order) at his feete, and kissing them with many thankes went backe to Bose am, kept possession of it as Lord by strong hand, and having the Testimony of his friends and followers, praised in pre∣sence of the King the Archbishop as Donor thereof, and so held it peaceably. Afterwards as wee read in Testa Nevilli (which was an Inquisition of Lands made in King Iohns time) King William, who attained to the conquest of England, gave this unto Wil∣liam Fitz Aucher and to his heires in fee farme paying out of it yearely into the Exche∣quer fortie pounds of silver tried and weighed ; and after that William Marescall held it as his inheritance. Chichester in the British tongue named Caercei, in the Eng∣lish Saxon language , in Latine Cioestria, lieth farther within, at the same nooke in a Champion plaine. A Cittie large enough, and walled about, built by Cissa a Saxon the second King of this Province and of him so named. For Cis∣san-Ceaster is nothing els, but the Cittie of Cissa: whose father Aella, was the first Saxon that here erected a Kingdome. Yet was it before the conquest of small or no name, and knowne onely by a monasterie of Saint Peter and a little Nunnerie. But in the reigne of William the first, as wee read in the Domes-day-booke, there were in this, one hundred Hages, and this Cittie was in the hand of Earle Roger Of Mont∣gomerie and there are in the said Hages or Houses. three-score. Mansions houses more than had beene before, It paid fifteene pounds to the King, and ten to the Earle. After this, when during the reigne of the said William the first, a decree was enacted, that Bishops Sees should bee translated out of small townes unto places of greater name and resort, it was graced with the Bishops residence which was before at Selsey, and beganne to flourish: not many yeares after Bishop Raulfe built there a Cathedrall church, which before hee had fully finished it, was sodainely by mishap of a fearce fire burnt downe. Yet by his endeavour and the bounteous liberality of King Henrie the first, it was raised up againe, and now, beside a Bishop, it hath also a Deane, a Chaunter, a Chancellor, a Treasurer, two Archdeacons and thirty Prebendaries. And at the same time the verie Cittie it selfe beganne to flourish, and had growne indeede to a most wealthie estate, but that the haven is badde and somewhat to farre off, and in that regard not so commodious: which neverthelesse the Cittizens goe now in hand to make more convenient by digging of a new channell. It is walled about in a circular round forme. The Lavant a pretty riveret running hard by it, on the West and South sides. Foure gates it hath opening to the foure quarters of the world: from whence the streets lead directly and crosse themselves in the mids, where the market is kept, and where Bishop Robert Read, erected a faire stone mar∣ket place, supported with pillars round about. As for the Castle that stood not farre from the North gate, Earles of Chichester. it was in times past the habitation of the Earles of Arundell, who hereupon stiled themselves, Earles of Chichester: but afterwards it became converted into an house of the Franciscan Friers. All that space which lieth betweene the West and South gates, is taken up with the Cathedrall Church, the Bishops pa∣lace, and the Deanes and Prebendaries houses. All which about King Richard the First his time were burnt againe. And Seffride the second Bishop of that name re edi∣fied all anew. The Church it selfe truly is not great, but very faire and neat, ha∣ving a spire steeple of stone, rising up passing high, and in the South Crosse-Isle of the Church, of the one side is artificially portraied, and depainted the historie of the Churches foundation, with the Images of the Kings of England: on the other, the Images of all the Bishops, as well of Selsey as of Chichester, at the charges of Robert Shirburne Bishop, In King Henrie the Eight his time. who greatly adorned and beautified this Church, and every where for his Empresse, set these Mots CREDITE OPERIBVS, that is, TRVST MEN ACCORDING TO THEIR DEEDS; and DILEXI DECOREM DOMVS TVAE DOMINE, that is, I HAVE LOVED (O LORD) THE BEAVTIE OF THY HOVSE. Neither hee onely adorned the Lords house, but repaired also the Bishops houses. But that great high tower which standeth neere unto the west dore of the Church, was built by R. Riman, as the report goeth (when he was forbidden to erect a castle at Aplederham his habitation hard by) of those stones, which for that Castle he had pro∣vided afore. Neere the haven of Chichester is W. Witering, where, as the monuments of the Church testifie, Aella the first founder of the Kingdome of Suth-sex arrived. Selsey. Scales. Selsey before said, is somewhat lower in the Saxon tongue, , that is to say, The Isle of Sea calves, (for these in our language wee call Scales, which alwaies seeke to Islands, Here be the best Cockles. and to the shore, for to bring forth their young, but now it is most fa∣mous for good cockles, and full Lobsters. A place (as Beda saith) compassed round about with the Sea, but onely in the West side, where it hath an entrie into it by land, as broad as a slings cast. It was reckoned by Survey taken, to containe fourscore and seven Hides of Land, when Edilwalch King of this Province gave it to Wilfride Bishop of Yorke, whiles hee was in exile▪ who first preached Christ unto this people, and as he writeth, not only by baptisme saved from thraldome under the divell, two hundred and fiftie bond-men, slaves. but also by giving freedome, delivered them from the yoke of bondage under man. Afterwards K. Cedwalla, who vanquished Edilwalch, founded here a Minster, and beautified it with an Episcopall See, which by Stigand the two and twentieth Bishop, was translated to Chichester, where it now flourisheth, and doth acknowledge Cedwalla to bee the founder. In this Isle remaineth onely the dead carkasse, as it were, of that ancient little citie, wherein those Bishops sat: and the same hidden quite with water at everie full sea, but at a low water, evident, and plaine to be seene. Then maketh the shore way for a river, which out of Saint Leonards Forrest run∣neth downe, Amberley. first by Amberley, where William Read Bishop of Chichester, in the raigne of Edward the third, built a castle for his successours: and so from thence, by Arundell, seated on the hanging of an hill, a place greater in name than deede, and yet is not that name of great antiquitie: for before Aelfreds dayes, who bequeathed it by testament to Anthelme his brothers sonne, I have not read it, so much as once named. Unlesse perhaps I should thinke, that Portus Adurni, is corruptly so called, by transposition of letters, for Portus Arundi. The reason of this name is fetched neither from that fabulous horse of Sir Beavois of Southampton, nor of Charudum, a promontorie in Denmarke, as Goropius Becanus hath dreamed, but of the valley or dale, which lieth upon the river Arun, in case Arun bee the name of the river, as some have delivered, who thereupon named it in Latine, Aruntina vallis, that is, Arundale. But all the fame it hath, is of the Castle, that flourished under the Sax∣on Empire, and which (as we read) presently upon the comming in of the Normans Roger Montgomerie repaired, who thereupon was , Earle of Arundell. For, a stately place it is, both by naturall situation, and also by mans hand verie strong. But his sonne Robert de Belismo, See the Earles of Shrews∣burie. who succeeded his brother Hugh, being by King Henrie the First proscribed, lost that, and all his other dignitie. For, when he had per∣fidiously raised warre against the King, he chose this Castle for his surest hold, whiles the warre lasted, and fortified the place with many munitions, but spedde no better than traitours use to doe. For, the Kings forces environing it everie way, at the last wonne it. Whenas Robert now had forfeited his estate, and was banished, the King gave this castle, and all his Lands besides unto * Adeliza, daughter to Godfrey Barbatus of Lovaine, Duke of Loraine and Brabant, for her Dowrie; whom he tooke to be his second wife. In whose commendation a certaine English man in that un∣learned age, wrote these not unlearned verses. Anglorum Reginatuos Adeliza decores Ipsa referre parans Musa, stupore riget. Quid Diadema tibi, pulcherrima, quid tibi gemma? Pallet gemma tibi, nec diadema nitet. Deme tibi cultus, cultum natura ministrat? Non exornari forma beata potest. Ornamenta cave, nec quicquam luminis inde Accipis, illa micant lumine clara tuo; Non puduit modicas de magnis dicere laudes, Nec pudeat Dominam te precor esse meam. When Muses mine thy beauties rare, (faire Adeliza Queene Of England) readie are to tell, they starke astonied beene. What booteth thee so beautifull, gold-crowne or pretious stone? Dimne is the Diademe to thee, the gemne hath beautie none. Away with trimme and gay attire; nature attireth thee, Thy lovely beautie naturall, can never bett'red be. All Ornaments beware; from them no favour thou do'st take; But they from thee their lustre have, thou doest them lightsome make. I shamed not on matters great to set small praises heere, Bash not, but deigne (I pray) to be my Soveraigne Ladie deere. She, after the Kings death, matched in marriage with William de D' aubeney, some write him, de Albi∣net , and de Albiniac . Earles of A∣rundell, and of Sussex. Charta antiqua X. in 29. Albeney, who taking part with Maud the Empresse against King Stephen, and defending this Castle against him, was in recompence of his good service, by the saide Maude the Empresse and Ladie of Englishmen, (for this title she used) created Earle of Arun∣dell: and her sonne King Henrie the Second gave the whole Rape of Arundell to that William: To hold of him by the service of fourescore and foure Knights fees, and one-halfe. And to his sonne William, King Richard the first granted, in such words as these, The Castle of Arundell with the whole Honor of Arundell, and the Third penny of the Plees out of Sussex, whereof he is Earle. And when after the fifth Earle of this surname, the issue male failed, one of the sisters and heires of Hugh the fifth Earle was married to Sir Iohn Fitz-Alan, Lord of Clun, whose great grand sonne Richard, For that he stood seised of the Castle, Honour and Lordship of Arundell in his owne de∣mesne as of Fee, Parl. 11. H 6▪ in regard of this his possession of the same Castle, Honour and Seignorie, without any other consideration or Creation to be an Earle, was Earle of Arundell and the name, state and honor of the Earle of Arundell, &c. Peaceably he enjoied: as appeareth by a definitive judgement given in Parliament, in the behalfe of Sir Iohn Fitz-Alan chalen∣ging the Castle and tittle of Arundell by force of an entaile against Iohn Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke the right Heire, in the neerest degree. Whereby it was gathered, that the name, state and dignitie of Earle, was annexed to the Castle, Honour and Seignorie of Arundell, as it is to be seene in the Parliament Rolls of King Henry the Sixth, out of which I have copied forth these notes word for word. Of these Fitz-Alans, Edmund se∣cond Earle sonne to Richard married the heire of the Earle of Surry, and was behea∣ded through the malicious furie, 229. of Queene Isabell not lawfully convicted, for that hee opposed himselfe in King Edward the Seconds behalfe against her wicked prac∣tises. His sonne Richard petitioned in Parliament to be restored to bloud, lands, and goods, 4. Edw. 3▪ for that his father was put to death not tried by his Peeres according to the law and great Charter of England: neverthelesse whereas the attaindor of him was confirmed by Parliament, hee was forced to amend his petition, and upon the amendment thereof, hee was restored by the Kings meere grace. Richard his sonne, as his grandfather died for his Soveraigne, lost his life for banding against his Soveraigne, King Richard the Second. But Tho. his sonne more honourably ended his life serving King Henrie the Fifth valerously in France, and leaving his sisters his heires generall; Sir Iohn of Arundell Lord Maltravers his next cosin, and heire male obtained of King Henrie the sixt the Earldome of Arundell, See before the Earles of Surrey. as we even now decla∣red, and also was by the said King for his good service created Duke of Touraine. Of the succeeding Earles I find nothing memorable. Henrie Fitz Alan the ele∣venth and last Earle of that surname lived in our daies, in great honor as you shall see. After whom leaving no issue male Philip Howard his daughters sonne succee∣ded, who not able to digest wrongs and hard measure offered unto him, by the cun∣ning sleights of some envious persons, fell into the toile and net pitched for him, and being brought into extreame perill of his life, yeelded up his vitall breath in the Tower. But his sonne Thomas a most honorable young man, (in whom a forward spirit and fervent love of vertue and glorie, most beseeming his nobility, and the same tempered with true courtesie shineth very apparently) recovered his fathers dignities being restored by King Iames, and Parliament authoritie. Besides the Castle and the Earles, Arundell hath nothing memorable: For, the Colledge built by the Earles, which there flourished, because the revenue or living is alienated and gone, now falleth to decay. Howbeit, in the Church are some mo∣numents of Earles there enterred, but one above the rest right beautifull, of Ala∣baster, in which lieth in the mids of the Quire Earle Thomas, and Beatrice his wife, the daughter of Iohn King of Portugall. Neither must I overpasse this Inscription so faire guilt, set up heere in the Honor of Henrie Fitz-Alan the last, Earle of this line, because some there be whom liketh it well. CONSECRATED TO VERTVE, AND HONOVR. THE MAGNANIMOVS, AND VVORTHY KNIGHT VVHOSE PERSONAGE IS HERE SEENE, AND VVHOSE BONES HERE VNDERNEATHLY ENTERRED, VVAS BARLE OF THIS TERRITORIE: ACCORDING TO HIS HOVSE, AND LINAGE SVRNAMED FITZ ALAN LOKD MALTRAVERS, CLVN, AND OS∣VVALDESTRE, PRINCIPAL HONOVRS: STILED ALSO LORD AND BARON OF THAT MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, THE AVNCIENTEST COM∣PANION VVHILES HE LIVED OF WILLIAM EARLE OF ARVNDELL, THE ONELY SONNE AND SVCCESSOR, COMPARTNER ALSO OF ALL HIS VERTV∣ES: VVHO BEING OF THE PRIVY COVNSEL TO KING HENRIE THE EIGHT, KING EDVVARD THE SIXT, MARIE, AND ELIZABETH, KINGS AND QVEENES OF ENGLAND, VVAS GOVERNOR ALSO OF THE TOVVNE OF CALES: AND VVHAT TIME AS THE SAID KING HENRIE BESIEGED BVL∣LEN VVAS HIGH MARESCHAL OF HIS ARMY, AND AFTER THAT LORD CHAMBERLAIN TO THE KING: ALSO VVHEN EDVVARD HIS SONNE VVAS CROVVNED KING, HE BARE THE OFFICE OF L. MARESCHAL OF THE KINGDOME: AND VNTO HIM LIKE AS BEFORE VNTO HIS FATHER BE∣CAME LORD CHAMBERLAINE. MOREOVER IN THE REIGNE OF QVEENE MARIE DVRING THE TIME OF HER SOLEMNE CORONATION, HE VVAS MADE LORD HIGH CONSTABLE, AFTERVVARD STEVVARD OF HER ROIAL HOVSE, AND PRESIDENT OF THE COVNCEL: EVEN AS TO QVEENE ELIZABETH ALSO, HE VVAS LIKEVVISE LORD HIGH STEVVARD OF HER HOVSHOLD. THVS THIS MAN, NOBLE BY HIS HIGH PARENTAGE, MORE NOBLE FOR VVEL PERFORMING THE PVBLICKE OFFICES OF STATE, OST NOBLE, AND RENOVNED BOTH AT HOME, AND ABROAD: FLOVRISHING STIL IN HONOVR, BROKEN VVITH TRAVEL, MVCH VVORNE VVITH YEERES, AFTER HE VVAS COME TO THE LXVIII OF HIS AGE, AT LONDON THE XXV. DAY OF FEBRVARY, IN THE YEERE OF OV , SALVATION BY CHRIST M. D. LXXIX. GODLY, AND SVVEETLY SLEPT IN THE LORD. IOHN LVMLEY, BARON OF LVMLEY, HIS MOST LOVING AND AF∣FECTIONATE As having married his daughter. SONNE IN LAVV, EXECVTOR OF HIS LAST VVIL, AND TESTAMENT, NOVV THAT HIS MOST SVVEET FATHER IN LAVV AND VERY GOOD PATRON IS RIGHT HONORABLY, AND SVMTV∣OVSLY BVRIED, HATH IN MOST DEVOVT MANNER VVITH ABVN∣DANT TEARES NOT FOR ANY MEMORIAL, VVHICH HIMSELFE ALREADY BY HIS MANIFOLD VERTVES HATH A TRNIZED, BVT IN REGARD OF HIS MORTAL BODY NOVV BESTOVVED IN HOPE OF AN HAPPY RESVRRECTION, CONSECRATED VNTO HIM, FOR THE LAST DVTY HE COVLD PERFORME, THIS KNIGHTLIKE STATVE, VVITH HIS DVE ARMORIES. As for the river Arun, which springing out of the North part of the Shire run∣neth heereby, it is encreased by many brooks falling into it from all sides, but the cheefe of them is that which passeth beside Cowdrey, a very goodly house of the Vi∣counts Montacute ; which for building oweth much to the late Vicount, & formerly to Sir William Fitz-Williams, Earle of South-hampton. Here by is Midherst that is Midle∣wood which braggeth of the Bohunes Lords thereof, who carried for their coate of armes a Crosse azur in a field Or, and from Ingelricus de Bohun under King Henrie the first, flourished unto King Henrie the seaventh his daies, who gave in marriage the daughter and heire of Iohn Bohun unto Sir David Owen Knight, the base sonne of Owen Theodor, with a rich inheritance. These Bohuns (to note so much by the way for the antiquity of a word now growne out of use) were by inheritance for a good while the Kings Spigurnells, Spigurnell what it is. that is, The Sealers of his writs, which office toge∣ther with Serjeancie of the Kings chappell, Iohn de Bohun the sonne of Franco resig∣ned unto King Edward the First, as wee reade in an old Charter made, as touching that matter. Petworth. Then this river leaveth about a mile off Petworth which together with one and twenty Knights fees William de Albeney Earle of Arundell, bestowed upon Ioscelin of Lovaine the Brabander, brother to Queene Adeleza, and the youn∣ger sonne of Godfrey Duke of Brabant, descended from the stocke of Charles the Great, what time as hee tooke to wife Agnes the onely daughter and heire of the Percies. Since which time, the posterity of that Iosceline, having assumed the name of Percie, The Percies. See in the end of Northum∣berland. (as I will els where shew) held it. A Familie, I assure you very ancient and right noble, which deriveth their pedigree from Charles the great more direct∣ly, and with a race of Ancestors lesse interrupted, than either the Dukes of Loraine Or of Guise that so highly vaunt themselves thereupon. Iosceline aforesaid, as I have seene it in his Donations, used this title: Ioscelin of Lovain, brother to Queene Ade∣liza, and Castellan of Arundell. And here about the Familie of Dautry, Or De alta ripa hath beene of right worshipfull esteeme, Dautry. as on the other side of the river the name of Goring at Burton, who were acknowledged founders of Hardham Or Hered∣ham a Priory of blacke Canons, Burton. a little off. Where this Arun meeteth with an other river of a deeper and bigger streame, which springeth neare Horseham an in∣different mercat, which some suppose to have taken name from Horsa the brother of Hengist, Horsham. who were the first leaders of the English Saxons into this isle of Britaine. Thus Arun increased, with sundry creekings, by Arundell before mentioned, hold∣eth on his course to the sea. Michelgrove. As the shoare giveth backe from the mouth of Arun, inwardly is Michel grove, that is, Great grove, the heire generall whereof so surnamed, was married to Ihon Shel∣ley, whereby, Shelley. Offington. The familie of the Wests. with the profession of the law, and a marriage with one of the coheires of Beknap the familie of Shelley was greatly enriched: Offington is not farre off well knowne by his ancient possessours the Wests Barons de la Ware. This of the Wests is a noble and ancient Familie, whose state beeing bettered by marriage with the heires of De Cantelup . Cantlow of Hemston and Fitz-Reginald Fitz Herbert, was adorned also with the title of Baron, Barons de la Ware. by the heire generall of the Lord de la Ware. Hard by, there is a fort compassed about with a banke rudely cast up, wherewith the Inhabitants are per∣swaded that Caesar entrenched and fortified his camp: But Cisiburie the name of the place, doth plainely shew and testifie, that it was the worke of Cissa : who beeing of the Saxons line the second King of this pety kingdome, Cisburie. after his father Aella, accom∣panied with his brother Cimen, and no small power of the Saxons, at this shoare arri∣ved and landed at Cimonshore, a place so called of the said Cimen, which now hath lost the name: Cimenshore. but that it was neere unto Wittering, the charter of the donation which King Cedwalla made unto the Church of Selsey, most evidently prooveth. Another fort likewise two miles from Cisiburie is to bee seene, which they use to call Chenk∣burie. Brood-water. Lord Camois. Camois. As you goe forward, standeth neere unto the sea, Broodwater, the Baronie of the Lords of Camois, who from the time of King Edward the First, flourished unto the daies of King Henrie the Sixt, what time the inheritance came by heires generall un∣to the Lewknors & Radmilds. Out of this familie (a thing neither in that age, nor in ours ever heard of (or exampled before) Sir Iohn Camois the son of the Lord Raulph Camois, of his owne free-will (the verie words these bee in effect, A wife given and granted to another. exemplified out of the Par∣liament Records) gave and demised his owne wife Margaret, daughter and heire of Iohn de Gaidesden unto Sir William Panell Knight, and unto the same William, gave granted, relea∣sed and quit claimed all the goods and chattels, which she hath, or otherwise hereafter might have: Parlam. 30. Edw. primi. and also whatsoever was in his hands of the foresaid Margarets goods, and chattels with their appurtenances: so that neither he himselfe, nor any man else in his name, might make claime, or challenge any interest, nor ought for ever, in the foresaid Margaret from hence forth, or in the goods and chattels of the said Margaret: Which is as much, as in one word they said in old time, The forme of a Bill of a kind of Di∣vorcement, called Kepu∣diu . Vt omnia sua secum haberet, That she should have away with her all that was hers. By which graunt, when shee demanded her dowrie in the Manour of Torpull which had been the possession of Sir Iohn Camois her first husband, there grew a memorable suite and controversie in Law: but wherein shee was over∣throwne and sentence pronounced. That she ought to have no dowrie from thence: upon a Statute made against women absenting themselves from their husbands, &c. These matters, I assure you, it goes against my stomacke to relate, but yet I see, it was not for nought that Pope Gregorie long since wrote unto Lanfranck Archbishop of Canterburie, How hee heard say, there were some among the Scots that not one∣ly forsooke, but also sold their wives, whereas in England they so gave and demi∣sed them. Somewhat lower upon the shore appeareth Shoreham, Shoreham. in times past , which by little and little fell to bee but a village, at this day called Old Shoreham, and gave encrease to another towne of the same name, whereof the greater part al∣so being drowned and made even with the sea is no more to bee seene: and the commodiousnesse of the haven by reason of bankes and bars of sand cast up at the rivers mouth quite gone: whereas, in foregoing times it was wont to carrie ships with full saile as farre as to Brember, which is a good way from the sea. This Brember was a castle sometime of the Breoses: For, King William the first gave it unto William de Breose, from whom those Breoses are descended, who were Lords of Gower and Brechnok: and from them also, both in this County and in Leicestershire, are come the Families of the Shirleys, Knights. But now in stead of a Castle, there is nothing but an heape of rubble and ruines. A little from this Castle lieth Stening, a great mercate, and at certaine set daies much frequented, which in Aelfrids will, unlesse I be deceived, is called Steningham, in latter times it had a Cell of Black-Monkes wherein was enshrined S. Cudman an obscure Saint, and visited by pilgrimes with oblations. That ancient place also, called PORTVS ADVRNI, as it seemeth is scarce three miles from this mouth of the river: where, when the Saxons first troubled our sea with their piracies, the Band called Exploratorum under the Roman Emperours kept their Station; but now it should seeme to bee choked, and stopped up with huge heapes of beach gathered together. For, that this was Ederington a pretie village, which the said Aelfred granted unto his younger sonne, Ederington. both the name remaining in part, and also certaine cottages adjoyning now called Portslade, that is, The way to the Haven, doe after a sort perswade: to say nothing, how easily they might land heere, the shore being so open and plaine. And for the same cause, our men in the reigne of King Henrie the Eighth, did heere especially wait for the Frenchmens gal∣lies all the while they hovered on our coasts and upon the sudden set one or two cot∣tages on fire at Brighthelmsted, which our ancestours the Saxons termed , the very next road or harbour thereunto. Some few miles from hence, there dischargeth it selfe into the sea a certaine ri∣ver, that hath no name, arising out of S. Leonards forrest neere unto Slaugham, Slaugham. the habitation of the Coverts, who in King Henrie the third his daies flourished in this quarter, with the degree of Knight-hood; thence by Cackfield to Linfeld, where in former ages was a small Nunnery; and so by Malling some-time a Manour appur∣taining to the Archbishops of Canterburie, Lewes. to Lewis, which peradventure hath his name of pastures called by the English Saxons . This for frequencie of people and greatnesse is reputed one of the chiefest townes of the County: Seated it is up∣on a rising almost on every side: That it hath beene walled there are no apparant to∣kens. Southward it hath under it, as it were, a great suburb called South-over, another Westward, and beyond the river a third Eastward called Cliffe because it is under a chalkie cliffe. In the time of the English Saxon government, when King Athelstan made a Law that money should not be coyned but in good townes, he appointed two minters, or coyners for this place. In the reigne of King Edward the Confessor it paid sixe pounds and foure shillings For custome or rent and roll. de Gablo et Theloneo. The King had there one hundred twenty seven Burgars. Their custome and manner was this, If the King min∣ded to send his souldiers to sea, without them: of all them, whose lands soever they were was collected twenty shillings, and all those had they that in their ships kept armour. Who selleth an horse within the Burgh giveth to the Provost one penny, and the buier, another. For an oxe or cow one halfe penny, Domesday booke. in what place so ever he buieth within the Rape. He that sheddeth bloud maketh amends for seven shillings. Hee that committeth adulterie or a rape, for eight shil∣lings and foure pence, Or redeem∣eth the of∣fence. and the woman as much. The King hath the Adulterer, The Arch∣bishop, the woman: when the mint or money is made new: every minter giveth twentie shil∣lings. Of all these paiments two third parts went to the King, and one third part to the Earle. William de Warren the first Earle of Surrie built here a large Castle on the highest ground for most part with flint and chalke. In the bottom of the towne called South∣over he founded to the honour and memory of Saint Pancrace a Priorie, and stored it with Cluniach Monkes, Cluniaco. In regard of the holinesse, religion, and charitie which he found in the Monasterie of Clugni in Burgundie (for these be the words taken out of the very originall instrument of the foundation) Whiles going in pilgrimage together with his wife for religion, he turned in, and lodged there. But this is now turned into a dwelling house of the Earle of Dorset. Howbeit there remaine still in the towne sixe Churches; a∣mongst which not farre from the Castle there standeth one little one all desolate, and beset with briers and brambles: in the walles whereof are ingraven in arched worke certaine rude verses in an old and over-worne character: which implie thus much, that one Magnus descended from the bloud roiall of the Danes, The monu∣ment of Magnus a Dane. who imbraced a solitarie life, was there buried: But behold the verses themselves, imperfect though they be, and gaping as I may so say, with the very yawning joynts of the stones. Which peradventure should be thus read. Clauditur hic miles, Danorum regia proles, Magnus nomen ei, magnae nota progeniei, Deponens Magnum, prudentior induit agnum: Praepete pro vita, fit paruulus Anachorita. A noble Knight, Sir Magnus hight, a name of great of-spring, Is shut up here, Though borne he were in line of Danish King: He wiser man, Puts Agnus on, and laies downe Magnus quite: For swift life this, Become he is a little Anchorite. About 346. yeeres since this place became famous for the mortall and bloudie battaile betweene K. Henrie the third, and the Barons: in which, the prosperous be∣ginning of the fight on the kings side, was the overthrow of the kings forces. For, whiles prince Edward the kings son, 1263. breaking by force through certain of the Barons troups, The battaile of Lewes. carelesly pursued the enemies over far, as making sure account of the victory: the Barons having reinforced themselves, giving a fresh charge, so discomfited, and put to flight the Kings armie, that they constrained the King to accept unequall con∣ditions of peace, and to deliver his sonne Prince Edward with others into their hands. From Lewis the river, 232. as it descendeth, so swelleth, that the bottom cannot containe it, and therefore maketh a large mere, and is fed more full with a brooket falling from Laughton, a seat of Pelhams, a family of especiall respect, by Gline that is in the British tongue, the vale, the habitation of Morleyes, whose antiquitie the name doth testi∣fie. And afterward, albeit it gathereth it selfe into a channell, yet often times it over∣floweth the low lands about it to no small detriment. Not farre from the said mere, Furle sheweth it selfe a principall mansion of the Gages, who advanced their estate by the marriage of one of the heires of Saint Clare, Princes favour, and Court Of∣fices. The shore next openeth it selfe at Cuckmere, which yet affordeth no commodious haven, Others call it, The three Charles. though it be fed with a fresh, which insulateth Michelham, where Gilbert de A∣quila, founded a Priory for black Chanons. And then at East-bourn the shore ariseth into so high a Promontory, called of the beach Beachy-points, and Beau-cliffe (for the faire shew being interchangeably compounded with rowe, of chalke and flint) that it is esteemed the highest cliffe of all the South coast of England. As hitherto from A∣rundell, and beyond, the countrey along the coast: for a great breadth, mounteth up into high hilles, Downes. called the Downes, which for rich fertilitie giveth place to few valleys, and plaines: so now it falleth into such a low levell and marsh, that the people think it hath been over-flowed by the sea. They call it Pevensey Marsh, of Pevensey the next towne adjoyning, Pevensey. which lieth in the plaine somewhat within the land upon a small river, which often times overlaieth the lands adjacent. In the old English Saxon Language, it was walled, , in the Norman speech Pevensell, now common∣ly, Pemsey: It hath had a meane haven, and a faire large castle, in the ruinous walles whereof, remaine great bricks, such as the Britans used, which is some argument of the antiquitie thereof. It belonged in the Conquerours time to Robert Earle of Moriton, Florentius wi∣gorniensis, pag. 452. halfe brother by the mothers side to the Conquerour, and then had fiftie and six Burgesses. After the attainder of his Sonne William Earle of Moriton, it came to King Henrie the First, by Escheat. In the composition betweene Stephen, and King Henrie the second both towne, Composition betweene King Ste∣phen, and Henrie of Anjoy. Honor de A∣quila. Robert de Mon∣te. and castle with whatsoever Richard de Aquila, had of the Honor of Pevensey, which after his name, was called Honor de Aquila, and Ba∣ronia de Aquila, or of the Eagle, was assigned to William Sonne to K. Stephen. But he surrendred it with Norwich into King Henrie the Seconds hand, in the yeere 1158, when he restored to him all such Lands as Stephen was seased of before hee usurped the crowne of England. After some yeeres King Henrie the third, over-favouring forrainers granted the Honor de Aquila (which had fallen to the crowne by Escheat, for that Gilbert de Aquila had passed into Normandie, against the Kings good will to Peter Earle of Savoy the Queenes uncle. But he fearing the envie of the English against forrainers relinquished it to the King, and so at length it came to the Dutchy of Lancaster. Herst Mon∣ceaux. Herst what it is. Inward from Pevensey is seated Herst in a Parke among the woods, which name also it hath of the woody situation: For, the ancient English-men cal∣led a wood . This was immediately after the Normans entry into England the seat of certaine noble gentlemen, who of that place were a good while named de Herst, untill William the sonne of Walleran de Herst, tooke unto him the name Mon∣ceaux, of the place haply where he was borne, an usuall thing in that age: whereupon that name also was adnexed unto this place, which ever since was of the Lord, ter∣med Herst Monceaux. From whose Posteritie by heire generall it descended haere∣ditarily to the Fienes. Regist, of the Monasterie of Roberts-bridge. The familie of the Fienes. Patent. 37. Henrie 6. An. 14. Ed. 4. These Fienes, called likewise Fenis, and Fienles, derive their pedigree from Ingelram de Fienes, who had wedded the heire of Pharumuse of Bo∣loigne, of the house of the Earles of Boloigne in France. About the time of King Ed∣ward the Second, Sir Iohn Fienes married the heire of Monceaux, his sonne William married one of the heires of the Lord Say, his sonne likewise the heire of Batisford, whose sonne Sir Roger Fienes married the daughter of Holland, and in the first yeare of King Henrie the Sixt built of bricke the large, faire, uniforme, & convenient house heere Castle-like within a deepe moate. The said King Henrie the Sixt, Accepted, de∣clared and reputed Sir Richard Fienis sonne of the said Sir Roger, to be Baron of Dacre, And the same tittle, King Edward the fourth chosen Arbitratour and Umpire be∣tweene him & Sir Humfrey Dacre, awarded & confirmed to the said S. Richard Fienis, and to the heires of his bodie lawfully begotten; for that he had married Ioane the cousin and next heire of Thomas Baron Dacre ; and to have praecedence before the L. Dacre of Gilesland heire male of the family. Since which time the heires lineally descending from him being enriched by one of the heires of the Lord Fitz-Hugh, have enjoyed the honor of Baron Dacre, untill that very lately George Fienis Lord Dacre sonne to the unfortunate Thomas Lord Dacre died without issue, whose onely sister and heire Margaret, Sampson Lennard Esquire a man both vertuous and courte∣ous tooke to wife, and by her hath faire issue. In whose behalfe it was published, decla∣red, and adjudged by the Lords Cōmissioners for Martiall causes, in the second yeere of the raigne of King Iames, with his privity, and assent Royall, That the said Marga∣ret ought to beare, have, and enjoy the name, state, degree, title, stile, honor, place, and pre∣cedency of the Baronie of Dacre; to have and to hold to her, and the issue of her bodie in as full and ample manner, as any of her ancestors enjoied the same. And that her children may, and shall have, take, and enjoy the place, and precedence respectively, as the children of her ancestors Barons Dacre have formerly had, and enjoyed. Now to returne to the Sea-coast, about three miles from Pevensey is Beckes-hill a place much frequented by Saint Richard Bishop of Chichester, and where he died. Vnder this is Bulver-hith in an open shore, with a rooflesse Church, not so named of a bulles hide which cut into thongs by William the Conquerour, reached to Battaile (as they fable) for it had that name before his comming. But heere he arrived with his whole fleete, landed his armie, and having cast a rampier before his campe, set fire on all his ships, that their onely hope might be in manhood, and their safety in victorie. See Nor∣mans before. And so after two daies marched to Hastings then to an hill neere Nen∣feld now called Standard hill, because (as they say) he there pitched his Standard, and from thence two miles farther where in a plaine the Kingdome of England was put upon the hazard and chance of a battaile; and the English-Saxon Empire came to a full period and finall end. For there, King Harold in the yeere of our Lord 1066. the day before the Ides of October, albeit his forces were much weakened in a former fight with the Danes, and his soldiers wearied besides with a long journey from beyond Yorke, encountred him in a place named Epiton. When the Normans had sounded the Battaile, first the skirmish continued for a pretty while with shot of arrowes from both sides; then, setting foote to foote, as if they fought man to man, they maintained fight a longer time: But when the English men had most valiantly received their first violent on set, the Norman horsmen with full cariere put forward and gave an hot charge. But seeing they also could not breake the battaile, they retired for the nonce, and yet kept their rankes in good order. The Englishmen sup∣posing them to flie, presently disranged themselves, and in disray preassed hard upon the enemies: but they, all on a sudden bringing backe their companies charged them a fresh on every side with all their joynt forces thicke united together and so enclo∣sing them round about, drove them backe with great slaughter: who not withstan∣ding having gotten the higher ground withstood the Normans a long time, untill Harold himselfe was shot through with an arrow and fell downe dead: for then straightwaies they turned their backes and betooke themselves every man to flight. The Duke lofty, and haughty with this victory, and yet not unmindfull of God the giver thereof, errected in memoriall of this battaile an Abbey to the glory of God, and S. Martin, which he called de Bello, or Battaile Abbey, in that very place where Harold after many a wound and stab among the thickest of his enemies gave up the ghost, that the same might bee as it were an everlasting monument of the Normans victorie: and therein he offered his sword, and royall robe which he ware, the day of his Coronation. These the Monkes kept untill their suppression, as also a table of the Normans gentry which entred with the Conquerour ; but so corruptly in later times, that they inserted therein the names of such as were their benefactours, and whosoever the favour of fortune or vertue had advanced to any eminencie in the subsequent ages. About this Abbey there grew afterwards a towne of the same name: or, (that I may use the words of the private History of this Abbey) As the Abbey encreased, there were built about the compasse of the same one hundred and fifteene houses of which the towne of Battell was made. Wherein there is a place called by a French word Sangue lac, of the bloud there shed: which by nature of the ground seemeth after raine to wax red. Whence, William Newborough, wrote although un∣truely, thus: The place, in which there was a very great slaughter of the English men figh∣ting for their countrey, if peradventure it be wet with any small showre, sweateth forth very fresh bloud endeed: as if the very evidence thereof did plainely declare that the voyce of so much Christian bloud there shed doth still cry from the earth to the Lord. But to the said Abbey King William the Conquerour granted many and great priviledges. And among other, to use the very words of the Charter. If any thiefe, murderer, or felon for feare of death fly and come to this Church, let him have no harme but be dismissed and sent away free from all punishment. Be it lawfull also for the Abbat of the same Church to deli∣ver from the gallowes any thiefe or robber wheresoever, if he chance to come by where such execution is in hand. Henrie the First likewise, A mercate kept on the Sunday. (that I may rehearse the words of his Charter) instituted a mercate to be there kept on the Lords day, free from all toll and tallage. But Sir Anthony Browne Lord Vicount Mount-acute, who not long since in that place built a goodly house, obtained of late by authoritie of Parliament, that this mercate should bee held upon another day. And as for the priviledges of Sanctuary, in those more heinous and grievous crimes, they are here and every way els by Parliamentary authoritie quite a∣bolished. For, they perceived well, that the feare of punishment being once removed; stout boldnesse, and a will to commit wickednesse grew still to greater head: and that hope of impunity was the greatest motive of ill-doing. Neither heere or in that quar∣ter nere adjoyning, Ashburnham. saw I any thing worth relation but onely Ashburnham, that gave the name to a family of as great antiquity as any one in all this tract. Hastings, Hastings. which I spake of, called in the English Saxon tongue . is situate somewhat higher upon the same shore. Some there bee that ridiculous∣ly derive this name from out of our tongue, from haste or quicknesse, forsooth; because as Matthew Paris, writeth William Conquerour at Hasting did set up hastily a fortresse of timber. But it may seeme to have taken this new name of Hastings a Danish Pirate, who wheresoever hee landed, with intent to spoile and raise booties, built oftentimes fortresses, as we read in Asserius Menevensis, of Boemflote castle built by him in Essex, as also of others at Appledor and Middleton in Kent. The tradition is that the old towne of Hastings is swallowed up of the sea. That which standeth now as I obser∣ved is couched betweene a high cliffe sea-ward and as high an hill land-ward, ha∣ving two streetes extended in length from North to South, * and in each of them a parish Church. The haven such as it is being fedde but with a poore small rill, is at the South end of the Towne, and hath had a great Castle upon the hill which o∣ver commanded it, now there are onely ruines thereof, and on the said hill Light houses to direct sailers in the night time. Here in the reigne of King Althel∣stan was a mint-house. Afterward it was accounted the first of the Cinque Ports, which with the members belonging to it, Cinqueports. namely Seford, Peuensey, Hodeney, Bul∣verhith, Winchelsey, Rhy, &c. was bound to finde one and twenty ships for warre at sea. In what manner and forme (if you desire to know) both this Port and the rest also were bound to serve the King in his warres at sea, for the immunities that they enjoy in most ample manner; have heere in those very same words whereby this was in times past recorded in the Kings Exchequer. Hastings with his members ought to find at the Kings summons one and twenty ships: 21. Edw. 1. And in every shippe there must bee one and twenty tall and able men, well armed and appointed for the Kings service. Yet so, as that summons bee made thereof on the Kings behalfe fortie daies before. And when the fore∣said ships and men therein, are come to the place whereunto they were summoned, they shall abide there in the Kings service for fifteene daies at their owne proper costs and charges. And if the King shall have farther neede of their service, after the fifteene daies above said, or will have them to stay there any longer, those ships with the men therein being, whiles they remaine there shal be in the Kings service, at the kings costs and charges, so long as it shall please the king, to wit, The Master of every ship shall receive sixe pence by the day, the Con∣stable sixe pence a day, and every one of the rest three pence by the day. Thus Hastings flourished long, 3946. inhabited with a warlike people and skilfull sailers, well stored with barkes and craies and gained much by fishing, which is plentifull along the shore. But after that the peere made of timber was at length violently carried away by ex∣treame rage of the sea, it hath decaied, and the fishing lesse used, by the reason of the dangerous landing, for they are enforced to worke their vessels to land by a Capstall or Craine. In which respect for the bettering of the towne, Queene Elizabeth gran∣ted a contribution toward the making of a new harbour, 1578. which was begun, but the contribution was quickly converted into private purses, and the publike good neg∣lected. Neverthelesse both Court, the Countrey, and Citie of London is served with much fish from thence. The whole Rape of Hastings and the Honour was holden by the Earles of Ew, (com∣monly called de Augi ) in Normandie, Ancenses. Earles of Ew. descended from the base sonne of Richard the First Duke of Normandie; untill the daies of Alice the heire of the house, whom in the reigne of Henrie the Third, Ralph de Issodun in France tooke to wife, whose posteritie lost a faire patrimonie in England, for that, as our Lawyers spake in those daies, * they were Ad fidem Regis Franciae, that is, under the king of France his allegiance. When King Henry the third had seazed their lands into his hands, hee granted the Rape of Hastings first to Peter Earle of Savoy, then to Prince Edward his sonne, and after upon his surrender to Iohn sonne to the Duke of little Britaine upon certaine exchanges of lands pertaining to the Honour of Richmond which Peter Earle of Savoy had made over for the use of the Prince. Long time after when the Duke of Britaine had lost their lands in England for adhering to the French King, King Henrie the Fourth gave the Rape of Hastings with the Manour of Crowherst, Burgwash, &c. to Sir Iohn Pelham the elder, Esc. 7. H. 6. upon whose loialtie, wisedome, and valour he much relied. Be∣fore we depart from Hastings, as it shall not bee offensive I hope, to remember that in the first daies of the Normans, there were in this shire great gentlemen surnamed Ha∣stings & de Hastings, Enquisition 5. Edw. 1. of whom Mathew de Hastings held the Manour of Grenocle in this service, that he should find at this haven an oa e, when the kings would crosse over the seas, so now the honourable house of the Hastings that are Earles of Huntingdon enjoy this title of Hastings. For King Edward the Fourth bestowed this title with certaine Royalties (as they terme them) upon Sir William Hastings his Chamberlaine. William Lord Hastings. Who is by Cominaus commended, for that having received an yearely pension of Lewis the eleaventh the French King hee could not for any thing bee brought to give unto the French King an acquittance of his owne hand writing. I will in no case (saith hee) that my hand-writing, bee seene amongst the accounts of the French Kings Treasure. But this man by diving so deepe into the friendship of Kings overwhelmed and drowned himselfe quite. For whiles hee spake his minde, and reasoned over franckly at a private consultation, with the Usurper King Richard the Third, all of a sodaine, and unlooked for, had hee was away, and without pleading for himselfe, presently made shorter by the head upon the next blocke. Neither is this to be passed over in silence that King Henrie the Sixth adorned Sir Thomas Hoo, a worthy knight, whom hee also chose into the order of the Garter, 26. Henry 6. Baron of Hoo and Hastings. with the title of Baron, Hoo, and Hastings: whose daughters and heires were married to Sir Gefferie Bollen, (from whence by the mothers side Queene ELIZABETH was descended) to Roger Coplie, to Iohn Carew, Iohn Devenish. From thence the shore passing under Farley hill farre seene both by sea, and land whereon standeth a solitary Church full bleakly, and a beacon is hollowed with an in-winding Bay, Winchelsey. and upon it standeth Winchelsey which was built in the time of King Edward the Frst, when a more ancient towne of the same name, in the Saxons tongue called , was quite swallowed up with the rough and raging Ocean in the yeare of our Lord 1250. (what time the face of the earth both heere and also in the coast of Kent neere bordering, became much changed). The situa∣tion thereof I will set before your eyes in the very words of Th. Walsingham. Situate it is upon a high hill, very steepe on that side, which either looketh toward the sea, or over-looketh the rode where ships lie at anchor. Whence it is that the way leading from that part to the haven goeth not streight forward, least it should by an over sodaine and downe right descent, force those that goe downe to fall headlong, or them that goe up to creepe rather with their hands then to walke: but lying side-waies it windeth with curving turnes in and out, Camber-Castle. to one side and the other. At first, it was inclosed with a rampier, after-wards with strong wals: and scarce beganne it to flourish, when it was sacked by the French men and Spaniards, and by reason that the sea shrunke backe from it, began sodainely (as it were) to fade and loose the beauty: * And now only beareth the coun∣tenance of a faire towne, and hath under it in the levell which the sea relinquished a Castle fortified by Henrie the Eighth, and large marshes defended from sea-rages with workes very chargeably: By the decay hereof and the benefit of the sea together. Rhie opposite unto it and as highly seated began to flourish, Rhie. or rather to reflourish, For that in old time it flourished: and that William of Ipres Earle of Kent fortified it, Ipres Tower now the prison, and the immunities or priviledges that it had in com∣mon with the Cinque-ports may sufficiently shew. But by occasion of the Vicinity of Winchelsey or the shrinking backe of the sea, it lay for a good while in former ages unknowne: But when Winchelsey decaied, and King Edward the Third walled it where the cliffes defended it not, it beganne to breath againe and revive: and in our fathers daies, the sea to make amends aboundantly for the harmes it had done rai∣sed with an unusuall tempest, so rushed in, and insinuated it selfe in forme of a bay that it made a very commodious haven, which another tempest also in our daies did not a little helpe. Since which time it greatly reflourished with inhabitants, buildings, fishing and navigation: and at this day there is an usuall passage from hence into Normandie, * yet now it beginneth to complaine that the sea abandoneth it (such is the variable, and interchangeable course of that element) and in part impu∣teth it, that the river Rother is not contained in his channell, and so looseth his force to carry away the sands and beach which the sea doth inbeate into the haven: Not∣withstanding it hath many fishing vessels and serveth London, and the Court with va∣rietie of sea-fish. Now whether it have the name of Riue a Norman word which signifieth a strond or Banke, I cannot easily say. But seeing that in Records it is very often called in Latine Ripa, and they who bring fish from hence be termed Ripiers, I encline rather this way, and would encline more, if the Frenchmen used this word for a stroud or shore, as Plinius doth Ripa. These two townes, (neither may it seeme impertinent to note it) belonged to the Abbey of Fescampe in Normandie. But when King Henry the Third perceived that religious men intermingled secretly in matters of State, he gave them in exchange for these two, Chiltenham and Sclover two Manours in Glocester-shire, and other lands; adding for the reason, that the Abbat and Monkes might not lawfully fight with temporall armes against the enemies of the Crowne. The River Rother. Barons Burg∣hersh. Into this haven the River Rother, or Rither sheddeth it selfe, which issuing forth at Ritheram fieldes (for so the Englishmen in ancient times called that towne, which wee doe Rotherfield ) passeth by Burgwash, in old time Burghersh, which had Lords so surnamed thereof: among whom was that Sir Bartholomew Burgwash, a mightie man in his time, who being approved in most weighty Ambas∣sages, and warres in Aquitaine, for his wisedome, and valour deserved, to be created a Baron of the Realme, to be admitted into the Order of the Garter, at the very first institution even among the Founders thereof, and to bee made Constable of Dover Castle, and Warden of the Cinque-ports. And his sonne carrying the same fore-name not degenerating from his father, lived in high honour and estimation; but hee left behind him one daughter, and no more issue, married into the house of Le Despencer ; of which there remaineth still a goodly of-spring of Noble personages. Baron Echingham. Echingham next adjoyning, had also a Baron, named William de Echingham, in the time of King Edward the Second, whose ancestours were the hereditarie Seneschals of this Rape. And their inheritance in the end, by the heires females name to the Barons of Windsor, and to the Tirwhits. Then the Rother dividing his water into three channels, passeth under Roberts bridge, Roberts Bridge, or Rotherbridge Bodiam. where Alured de S. Martin, in King Henrie the seconds daies founded a Monasterie: and so running beside Bodiam, a Castle belonging to the an∣cient Family of the Lewknors, built by the Dalegrigs, here falleth (as I said) into the Ocean. Now I have passed along the Sea coast of Sussex. And as for the mid-land part of the shire, I have nothing more to relate thereof, unlesse I should recount the woods, and forrests, lying out faire in length and breadth, which are a remnant of the vast wood, Anderida. Among which, to begin at the West, those of greatest note are these, The forrest of Arundill, Saint Leonards forrest, Word forrest, and not farre off East Gren-sted anciently a parcell of the Barony of Eagle, and made a Mercate by King Henry the seventh. Ashdowne forrest, under which standeth Buckhurst the habitation of the ancient house of the Sackviles, out of which race Queene Elizabeth in our daies aduanced Thomas Sackvile her allie by the Bollens, a wise Gentleman, to be Baron of Buckhurst, Baron Buck∣hurst. took him into her Privie Councell, admitted him into the most honorable Order of the Garter, and made him Lord Treasurer of England: whom also of late, K. Iames created Earle of Dorset. Waterdown forrest, where I saw Eridge, a lodg of the Lord Abergevenny, and by it craggie rocks rising up so thicke, as though sporting na∣ture had there purposed a sea. Here-by in the very confines of Kent, is Groomebridge an habitation of the Wallers, whose house there was built by Charles Duke of Orleance, father to K. Lewis the 12. of France, when he being taken prisoner in the battaile at Agincourt, by Richard Waller of this place, was here a long time detained prisoner. Earles of Sussex. As touching the Earles; Sussex had five by the line of Albiney, who were likewise called Earles of Arundell ; but had the third pennie of Sussex, as Earles then had. The first of them was William D' Albiney, the sonne of William, Butler to King Henrie the first, See Earles of Arundell. and Lord of Buckenham in Norfolk: who gave for his armes Gules, a Lion rampant, Or: and was called one while Earle of Arundell, and another while Earle of Chichester, for that in those places he kept his chiefe residence. This man, of Adeliz the daughter of Godfrey With the beard. Barbatus Duke of Lorraine, and of Brabant, Queen Dowager, or Widdow of K. Henrie the First, begat William the second Earle of Sussex, and of Arundell, father to William the third Earle: unto whom Mabile the si∣ster, and one of the heires of the last Raulph Earle of Chester, bare William the fourth Earle, & Hugh the fifth, who both died without issue, and also foure daughters mar∣ried unto Sir Robert Yateshall, Sir Iohn Fitz-Alan, Sir Roger de Somery, and Sir Robert de Mount-hault. After this, the title of Arundell budded forth againe, as I said before, in the Fitz-Alans: but that of Sussex lay hidden, and lost unto this our age: which hath seene five Ratcliffes, descended of the most Noble house of the Fitz-walters, (that derived their pedigree from the Clares ) bearing that honour, to wit, Robert created Earle of Sussex by King Henrie the Eight, who wedded Elizabeth daughter of Henry Stafford Earle of Buckingham, 21. Henry 8. of whom he begat Henrie the second Earle: unto whom Elizabeth the daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, brought forth Thomas: who being Lord Chamberlaine to Queene Elizabeth, died without issue, a most worthy and honourable personage, in whose mind were seated joyntly both po∣litike wisedome, and martiall prowesse, as England and Ireland acknowledged. Him succeeded Sir Henrie his brother, and after him Robert his onely sonne, now in his flower. This Province containeth parishes. 312. THus farre of Sussex, which together with Suth-rey, was the ha∣bitation of the Regni, The King∣dome of the South-Sax∣ons. in the time of the Britaines, and afterwards the kingdome of the South-Saxons, called in the Saxon tongue, , which in the two and thirty yeare after the Saxons comming, was begun by Ella, who, as Beda writeth, First among the Kings of the English Nation ruled all their Southern Provinces, which are severed by the River Humber, and the limits adjoyning thereto. The first Christian King was Edilwalch, baptized in the presence of Wulpher King of Mercia, his Godfather, and he in signe of adopti∣on gave unto him two Provinces, namely, the Isle of Wight, and the Province of the Meanvari : But in the 306. yeare after the begin∣ning of this Kingdome, when Aldinius the last King was slaine by Ina King of West-Saxons, it came wholly under the Dominion of the West-Saxons. CANTIVM. N Ow am I come to Kent, which Countrey although master WILLIAM LAMBARD, a man right well endued with excellent learning, and as godly vertues, hath so lively depainted out in a full volume, that his painefull felicitie in that kind bath left little, or nothing for o∣thers, yet according to the project of this worke which I have taken in hand, I will runne it over also: and least any man should thinke, that as the Comicall Poet saith, I deale by way of close pilfering I willingly acknowledge him, (and deserve he doth no lesse) to have beene my foundation, and fountaine both of all (well-neere) that I shall say. Time as yet hath not bereft this Region of the ancient name, Carion, cor∣ruptly read in Diodorus Si∣culus. but as it was called CANTIVM by Cesar, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, Ptolomee, and others, so that Saxons named it, as Ninnius witnesseth, , that is, The countrey of the people inhabiting Cantium, and wee Kent. This name master Lambard deriveth from Caine, which among the Britaines, soundeth as much as a greene Bough, because in old time it was shadowed with woods. But it may be lawfull for mee to put in my con∣jecture; whereas Britaine heere runneth out with a mightie nooke, or cor∣ner into the East, and I have observed, that such a kind of nooke in Scot∣land, is called, Cantir ; Againe, that the Inhabitants of another Angle in that part of the Island, are by Ptolomee termed Cantae, as also that the Cangani in Wales, were possessed of another corner, (to say nothing of the Cantabri, Hereof com∣meth Canton in Heraldrie, for a corner; and the Hel∣vetians coun∣treys, were b the French called Canton. who likewise dwelt in an angle among the Celtiberians, who as they came from one originall, so likewise they were of the same language with our Britans) I would guesse, that the name was given by reason of the forme and scituation, and so much the rather, both for that our Frenchmen have used Canton for a Corner, and that (as it is probable) from the old Language of the Gauls: for it comes not from the Germane or Latine tongue, which together with that old tongue, be the mothers of this latter French tongue; and also because this Countrey by all the old Geographers is called Angulus. For it looketh full upon France with a huge Angle, compassed with the aestuarie of Tamis, and with the Ocean sea, saving, that Westward it hath Surrey, and southward Sussex to confine upon it. KENT. T He Region which we call Kent, extendeth it selfe in length, from West to East fifty miles, and from South to North 26. For scituation, it is not uniforme as being more plaine toward the West, and full of shady woods; but higher Eastward, by rea∣son of hils, mounting up with easie ascents. The Inhabitants distinguish it as it lyeth South-east-ward from the Tamis, into three plots or portions, they call them steps or degrees; the upper whereof, lying upon Tamis, they say is healthfull, but not so wealthy: the middle they account both healthfull, Rumney Marsh. and plentifull: the lower they hold to bee weal∣thy, but not healthy: as which for a great part thereof is very moist, yet it bringeth forth ranke grasse in great plenty. Howbeit every where almost it is full of meadowes, pastures, and cornefields: abounding wonderfully in apple-trees, and cherrie-trees also, which being brought out of Pontus into Italie, in the 608. yeare after the foun∣dation of Rome, P a . 15. ca. 25. Cherries were brought over into Britaine about the yeare of our Lord 48. 236. and in the 120. yeare after translated from thence into Britaine, pro∣sper heere exceeding well, and take up many plots of land: the trees being planted af∣ter a direct manner one against another by square, most pleasant to behold. It hath villages and townes standing exceeding thicke, and well peopled, safe rodes, and sure harbours for ships, with some veines of iron and marle: but the aire is somewhat thicke, and somewhere foggie, by reason of vapours rising out of the waters. At a word, the revenues of the Inhabitants are greater both by the fertilitie of the soile, and also by the neighbourhood of a great citie, of a great river, and the maine sea. The same commendation of civilitie and courtesie which Cesar in old time gave the In∣habitants, is yet of right due unto them: that I may not speake of their warlike prow∣esse, whereas a certaine Monke hath written, Prowesse of Kentishmen. How the Kentishmen so farre excelled, that when our armies are ready to joyne battaile, they of all Englishmen, are worthily placed in the Front, as being reputed the most valiant and resolute souldiers. Which, Iohn of Salis∣burie, verifieth also in his Polycraticon. For good desert (saith he) of that notable valour, which Kent shewed so puissantly, and patiently against the Danes, it retaineth still unto these daies in all battailes the honour of the first and fore-ward, yea, and of the first conflict with the enemie. In praise of whom William of Malmesbury hath likewise written thus, The country people and towne-dwellers of Kent, above all other Englishmen retaine still the resent of their ancient worthinesse. And as they are more forward, and readier to give honour, and etertainment to others, so they be more slow to take revenge upon others. Iulius Cesar. Cesar (to speake briefly by way of Preface, before I come to describe the particular places) when he first attempted the conquest of our Island; arrived at this countrey; but being by the Kentish Britans, kept from landing, obtained the shore not without a fierce encounter. When he made afterward his second voyage hither, here likewise hee landed his armie: and the Britaines with their horsemen and wagons encountred them couragiously, but beeing soone by the Romans repulsed, they withdrew them∣selves into the woods. After this they skirmished sharpely with the Roman Cavallery in their march, yet so, as the Romans had every way the upper hand. Also, within a while after, they charged the Romans againe, and most resolutely brake through the midst of them, and having slaine Laberius Durus, Marshall of the field retired safe: and the morrow after set upon the Foragers, and victualers of the campe, &c. which I have briefly related before out of Cesars owne Commentaries. At which time, Cynge∣torix, Carvilius, See Romans in Britaine. Page 34. Taximagulus, and Segonax were great Commanders of Kent (whom he, because he would be thought to have vanquished Kings, termeth Kings ) whereas indeed they were but Lords of the countrey, or Noble men of the better marke. After the Roman Empire was heere established, it was counted under the juris∣diction of the President of Britannia Prima. But the Sea coast which they termed CANTIVM Quod nunc KENT LITTVS SAXONICVM, that is, The Saxon shore, like as the opposite shore unto it, from the River Rhene to Xantoigne in France, had a Ruler over it from Dioclesians time whom Marcellinus calleth Tractus maritini Comitem, that is, The Count, or Lieutenant of the Maritime tract: The Count or Comes of the Saxon coast. the booke of Notices, stileth him: The honourable, Earle or Lieute∣nant of the Saxon shore along Britaine, whose office was with garrisons set upon the shore in places convenient, to represse the depredations, and robberies of Barbarians, but of Saxons especially, who grievously infected Britaine. And hee was under the dispose of the Right honourable Generall of the Footemen, whom they called Praesen∣talis, who besides the Garrisons lying at the Havens, assigned unto him for the defence thereof at all assaies, Victores Iuniores Britannicianos Primanos Iuniores, and Secunda∣nos Seniores, The L. War∣den or Keeper of the Cinque ports. (these are the names of certaine bands or Companies) this hee had for his under Officers to it, Principem ex officio Magistri praesentalium a parte peditum, Nume∣rarios duos, Commentariensem, Cornicularium, Adjutorem, Subadjuvam, Regerendarium, Exceptores singulares, &c. Neither doubt I, but that our Ancestors imitated this custome of the Romans, when they placed over this coast a Governour or Portreve, whom now they use to call Warden of the Cinque Ports, because as the Comes or Earle of the Saxon shore aforesaid was Governour of nine Ports, so he is of five. But when the Romans were departed quite out of Britaine, Vortigern, who bare so∣veraigne rule in the greatest part of Britaine, placed over Kent a Guorong, that is to say, a Vice Roy, or Freed man under him, and unwitting to him, hee forthwith freely granted this region, as Ninnius and William of Malmesbury write, unto Hengist the Saxon, for his daughter Rowens sake: upon whom hee was exceedingly enamoured. Hence it came, that the first Saxon Kingdome erected in Britaine in the yeare of our Lord 456. was called by them , that is, The Kingdome of the Kentishmen, which after three hundred and twenty yeares, when Baldred their last King was sub∣dued, fell to bee under the Dominion of the West Saxons, to whom it continued subject untill the Normans Conquest: For then, if we may beleeve Thomas Spot the Monke, (for none of the more ancient Writers have recorded it) the Yeomanrie of Kent at Swanes-comb (a village this is where (they say) Suene the Dane sometime pit∣ched his campe) carrying before them in their hands every one a great greene bough representing a farre of a moving wood, yeilded themselves unto William the Con∣querour upon this condition that they might retaine their ancient customes unviola∣ted, and especially that which they call Gavelkind, that is, Give all kinne, by which they are not so bound by Copyhold, customarie tenures, or Tenant-right, as in other parts of England, but in manner every man is a free-holder, and hath some part of his owne to live upon. For lands of this nature are equally divided among the male children, or if there be no sonnes, among the daughters. By vertue of this also, they are at full age and enter upon their inheritance when they come to be fifteene yeares old: and lawfull it is for them to alienate and make it over to any one, either by gift or by sale, without the Lords consent. By this likewise, the sonne though their parents were condemned for theft, succeede them neverthelesse in such kind of Lands, &c. which I leave to Lawyers. So that, it is truely though not purely written in La∣tine in an old book thus: The County of Kent avoucheth, that this County ought by right to be free from such kind of grievance: for it saith, that this County was never conquered, as the residue of England was, but by concluding of a peace subjected themselves to the domi∣nion of the Conquerour, retaining to themselves all their liberties, immunities, and cu∣stomes, which they had, and used before time. After this, William the Conquerour, that hee might more firmely assure to himselfe Kent, which is the very key of England, placed a Constable over Dover Castle, and according to the ancient order of the Ro∣mans made him also Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. And these bee they, Hastings, Dover, Hith, Rumney and Sandwich, unto which, Winchelsey, and Rie are joyned as prin∣cipall ports, and other small townes as Members. Which because they are bound to serve in the warres by sea, enjoy many great immunities: as who are free from pay∣ment of Subsidies, and from Wardship of their children as touching the bodie, nei∣ther are they sued in any court, but within their owne townes; and of the inhabitants therein, such as they call Barons, at the Coronation of Kings and Queenes support the Canopies over them, yea and have a table by themselves that day spred and furnished on the Kings right hand, &c. And the Lord Warden himselfe, who is alwaies one of the Nobilitie of most approved trust, hath within his jurisdiction the authoritie of a Chancellour and Admirall in very many cases, and enjoyeth other rights besides. But now returne we to the places. The Northside of this Country, Tamis the soveraigne of all Rivers in Britaine runneth hard by, * as I have said before, which having held on his course past Surrey, forthwith being with a winding reach almost retired into himselfe, doth there ad∣mit into his channell into the first limit of this shire Ravensburne a small water, Ravensburn. An old great Campe. and of short course, which riseth in Keston heath hard under the pitching of an ancient campe, strange for the height of double rampiers, and depth of double ditches of all that I have seene: doubtlesse the worke of many Labouring hands. Of what capa∣citie it was I could not discover for that the greatest part thereof is now severall, and overgrowne with a thicket, but verily great it was, as may bee gathered by that which is apparent. We may probably conjectture that it was a Roman Campe, but I might seeme to rove; if I should thinke it that Campe which Iulius Caesar pitched, when the Britans gave him the last battaile with their whole forces, and then ha∣ving bad successe retired themselves, and gave him leave to march to the Tamis side. And yet certes Keston the name of the place seemeth to retaine a parcell of Ke∣sars name for so the Britaines called him, and not Caesar, as wee doe. As for the other small intrenchment not farre of by W. Wickham, it was cast in fresh memory when old Sir Christopher Heydon a man then of great command in these parts, trained the country people. This water having passed by Bromeley a Mansion house of the Bi∣shops of Rochester, when it hath gathered strength, the depth of his ford giveth name to Depe-ford: Depe-ford. a most famous Ship-docke, where the Kings ships are built, and such as be decaied, repaired: there also is a goodly Store-house and a Colledge (as it were) or incorporation ordained for the use of the navie. The place was some∣time called West-Greenwich, and at the conquest of England fell to Cislebert Mamignot for his share, whose Grand-child Walkelin, defended Dover Castle against King Ste∣phen, and left behind him one onely daughter living, who when her brother was dead, Magnignot. by her marriage brought a rich inheritance called the Honor of Mamignot into the family of the Saies. From hence the Tamis goeth to Green-wich, that is, the Greene Creeke, for the creek of a river in the old English tongue was called Wic, Green-wich. a place in times past fa∣mous for the Danish Fleet that lay there often at Rode, and for the Danes crueltie shewed unto Ealpheg Archbishop of Canterbury, whom in the yeare of our Lord a thousand and twelve, they cruelly executed with most exquisite torments. Whose death together with the cause thereof Ditmarus Mersepurgius, who about the same time lived, hath thus in the eighth booke of his Chronicles described. I understood (saith he) by the relation of Sewald, a pitifull deede, and therefore memorable: namely, That the perfideous crew of The same that Danes. Northman souldiours under Thurkil as yet their Captaine, tooke that excellent prelate, Archbishop of the Citie of Canterburie named Ealph g with the rest, and them after their wicked manner emprisoned and bound, yea and put him to endure famine and unspeakeable paines. This good man moved with humane frailtie promiseth unto them a summe of money, and for the obtaining thereof did set downe a time betweene, that if in this space he could not by some acceptable ransome escape this momentany death, hee might yet in the meane while purge himselfe with many a groane, to be offered as a lively sacrifice unto the Lord. But when all the time & space appointed were come & gone, this greedy gulfe of Pirates called forth the servant of the Lord, & in threatning wise demands this tribute promised un∣to them to be spedily and out of hand paid Then he, as a meeke Lamb, Here am I, quoth he, rea∣dy to undergoe even for the love of Christ whatsoever ye presume now to doe against me, that I may deserve to become an example of his servants. And nothing am I troubled at this day. And whereas I seeme unto you a lyer, it is not mine owne will but great neede and povertie that hath done it. This body of mine, which in this exile I have loved overmuch, I present as culpable unto you, and I know it is in your power to doe with it, what yee intend: but my sinfull soule that regardeth not you, I humbly commend to the Creator of all things. As hee was thus speaking, the whole rabble of these prophane wretches hemmed him round about and getteth together divers and sundry weapons to kill him. Which when their leader Thurkill saw a farre off, he came quickly running and crying, Doe not so in any wise I beseech you: and heere, with my whole heart I deliver unto you all my gold and silver and whatsoever I have heere, or can by any meanes come by, save my ship onely, that yee would not sinne against the Lords annointed. But this unbridled anger of his mates, harder than yron and flint was nothing mollified with so gentle words and faire language of his, but became pacified by shed∣ding his innocent bloud, which presently they altogether confounded and bleanded with Ox∣heads, stones as thicke as haile, and billets hurled at him. And to the memorie of this Saint Ealpheg is the Parish Church heere consecrated. But now is the place of very great name, by reason of the Kings house, which Humfrey Duke of Glocester built and named Placence ; which also King Henrie the Seventh most sumptuously enlarged: who adjoyned thereto a little house of observant Friers, and finished that towre famous in Spanish fables, which the said Duke of Glocester begun, on an high hill, from whence there is a most faire, and pleasant prospect open to the river winding in and out, and almost redoubling it selfe, the greene meddowes and marshes underlying, the Citie of London, and the Countrie round about. Which being now enlarged and beau∣tified by the L. Henrie Howard Earle of Northampton, Lord Privie Seale, &c. cannot but acknowledge him a well deserving benefactor. But the greatest ornament by far that graced this Green-wich, was our late Queene Elizabeth, who heere most happi∣ly borne to see the light by the resplendent brightnesse of her royall vertue enlight∣ned all England. But as touching Green-wich have heere these verses of Leland the Antiquarian Poet: Ecce ut jam niteat locus petitus Tanquam syderea domus cathedrae. Quae fastigia picta? quae fenestrae? Quae turres vel ad astra se efferentes? Quae porro viridaria, ac perennes Fontes? Flora sinum occupat venusta Fundens delicias nitentis horti. Rerum commodus aestimator ille, R pae qui variis modis amoenae, Nomen contulit eleganter aptum. How glittereth now this place of great request, Like to the seate of heavenly welkin hie? With gallant tops, with windowes of the best. What towres that reach even to the starry skie: What Orchards greene, what springs ay-running by. Faire Flora heere that in this creeke doth dwell, Bestowes on it the flowers of garden gay; To judge no doubt of things he knew full well, Who gave this banke thus pleasant every way, So fit a name, as did the thing bewray. Nothing else have I here to note (but that, for I would not have the remem∣brance of well deserving benefactors to miscarry) William Lambard a godly good Gentleman built an Almeshouse here for the sustentation of poore persons which hee named The Colledge of Queene Elizabeths poore people, and as the prying adver∣saries of our religion then observed, was the first Protestant that built an Hospitall. At the backe of this, Eltham. as ye turne out scarce three miles off, standeth Eltham, a re∣tyring place likewise of the Kings, but unholsomly by reason of the moate. Anthony Becke Bishop of Durham, and Patriarch of Ierusalem built this in a manner new, and gave unto Queene Eleanor wife to King Edward the First, after hee had crafti∣ly conveyed unto himselfe the inheritance of the Vescyes, unto whom this place be∣fore belonged. The Booke. of Durham. For that Bishop, whom the last Baron of Vescy had made his foefie for trust, of all his inheritance to the use of William Vescy his little base sonne, dealt not so faithfully, as he should with this orphane and ward of his, but dispoiled him of Alnwick Castle, this, and other faire lands. The Breach. 1527. Leisnes. Beneath Greenwich, the Thames having broken downe his bankes, hath by his ir∣ruption surrounded and overwhelmed many acres of land. For the inning whereof divers have as it were strugled with the waters now many yeares; and yet with great workes, * and charges cannot overmaster the violence of the tides, which the Chanons of Liesnes adjoyning kept sound and sweete land in their times. This Abbey was founded 1179. by Lord Richard Lucie chiefe Iustice of England, and by him dedica∣ted to God and the memorie of Thomas of Canterburie, whom hee so admired for his piety, while other condemned him for pervicacie against his Prince, as hee be∣came here a devoted Chanon to him. Heere in the marshes groweth plentifully the hearbe Cochlearia, called by our Countrey men Scurvy-grasse, which some Phisicians would have to be the same which Plinie calleth Britannica, Scurvy-grasse. 1527. The herbe Britannica. by which name I have already made mention thereof: but heare what Plinie saith. In Germany, when as Germanicus Caesar had removed his campe forward beyond Rhene, in the maritime tract there was one fountaine and no more, of fresh water, whereof if a man dranke, with∣in two yeares his teeth would fall out of his head and the joynts in his knees become loose and feeble. Those diseases the Phisicians tearmed Stomacace and Sceletyrbe. For reme∣die hereof, there was found an hearbe called Brittannica, holesome not onely for the sinewes and maladies of the mouth but also against the Squincie and stinging of serpents, &c. They of Friseland. Frisia, * what way our campe lay, shewed it unto our souldiours. And I marvaile what should bee the cause of that name, See afterward in the British Isles, concer∣ning the Arre∣nat or Armo∣ry of the Bri∣taines. unlesse peradventure they that confine upon the Ocean, de∣dicated the name thereof to Britaine, as lying so nere vnto it. But that most learned Ha∣drian Iunius in his booke named Nomenclator, bringeth another reason of the name whom you may have recourse unto if you please: For, this word Britannica hath here diverted me a side from my course. From thence the Thames being contained within his bankes meeteth with the ri∣ver Darent, which falling downe out of Suthrey runneth with a soft streame not farre from Seven-oke (so called as men say of seven exceeding great Okes now cut downe) which commendeth Sir William Sevenok an Alderman of London, * who being a foundling and brought up here; Sevenoke. and therefore so named, built heere in gratefull re∣membrance an Hospitall and a schoole. On the East side of it standeth Knoll so cal∣led for that it is seated upon a hill, which Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of Canter∣bury purchasing of Sir William Fienes, Knoll. Lord Say and Seale, adorned with a faire house: and now lately Thomas Earle of Dorset Lord Treasurer hath fourbished and beautifi∣ed the old worke with new chargeable additaments. Otford. Darent then passeth by , now Otford, a place famous in former ages for an overthrow and slaughter of the Danes which happened there in the yeare 1016. and lately by rea∣son of the Kings house, which William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury built, for himselfe and his successours so sumptuously, that for to avoid envie, Cranmer who next succeeded him was constreined to exchange it with King Henrie the Eighth. Somewhat lower hard by Darent standeth Lullingstone, where there was sometime a Castle the seat of a family of the same name, but now of Sir Percival Hart, descen∣ded from one of the coheires of the Lord Bray. Dartford. Then Darent giveth name unto Da∣rentford, commonly Dartford a great mercat towne well frequented, and well wate∣red, where King Edward the Third built a Nunnery, which King Henry the Eighth converted into a house for himselfe and his successours: Heere the rivelet Crey, an∣ciently called Crecan intermingleth it selfe with Darent, when in his short course hee hath imparted his name to five townelets which hee watereth, as Saint Mary Crey, Pauls Crey, Votes-Crey, North Crey, and Crey-ford, in former ages Crecanford, where Hengist the Saxon the eighth yeare after his arrivall, joyned battaile with the Brit∣taines, and after he had slaine their captaines, brought them under with so great a slaughter, that afterwards hee never stood in feare of them, but established his king∣dome quietly in Kent. From the river Darent or Dart unto the mouth of Medway, the Thames seeth no∣thing above him but little townes pleasantly seated, which to passe over in silence were no prejudice either of their fame or any thing els. Swane-scomb that is King Swanes Campe. Yet amongst them is Swans-combe (of which I have heretofore spoken) of honorable memorie among the Kentish men, for obtaining their the continuance of their ancient franchises, after∣ward it was well knowne by the Montceusies, men of great Nobility the owners ther∣of who had there Barony here-about. And by it Graves-end so called (as Master Lambert is my author) as the Gereves-end ; that is, the limit of the Gereve or Reve. A towne as well knowne as any other in England, for the usuall passage by water betweene it and London, Graves-end. since the Abbat of Grace by the tower of London, to which it appertained, obtained of King Richard the second that the inhabitants of it and Milton onely, should transport passengers from thence to Lon∣don. King Henrie the Eighth when he fortified the sea coast, raised two Platformes or Block-houses here, and two other opposite on Essex side. Beyond Graves-end is Shorn held anciently by Sir Roger Northwood by service to carry with other the kings tennants a white ensigne fortie daies at his owne charges when the King warred in Scotland. Inquis. 35. E. 3 Somewhat more within the land, lieth Cobham, the habitation for a long time of the Barons of Cobham ; of whom Iohn Cobham the last of that name, founded a Colledge here and a castle at Cowling: Barons of Cobham. who left one onely daughter wife to Sir Iohn de la Pole Knight: Shee likewise bare but one daughter, though married in her time to many husbands. But by Sir Reginald Braibrooke onely had shee issue As for her husband Sir Iohn Old Castle, whiles hee endeavoured to bring in innovation in religion, was both hanged, and burnt. Ioane her onely daughter by Sir Reginald Braybrooke, was wedded unto Thomas Broke of Somersetshire, from whom six Lord Cobhams have lineally descended, and flourished in honorable reputation untill our time. From Graves-end a little country called Ho, lying as a demy Island between rivers Thames and Medway stretcheth it selfe into the East, and is for situation but unholsome. At the entry hereof is Cowling Castle built by Iohn Lord Cobham in a moorish ground, and Cliffe a good bigge towne, so called of a cliffe upon which it standeth. Clive at Ho. But whether it bee that Clives at Ho, so famous in the tender age and in∣fancie of our English Church, by reason of a Synode there holden I dare not as o∣thers doe, affirme: considering, that in regard of the site it is a place inconvenient for such an assembly; and besides that Clives at Hoo seemeth to have beene within the Kingdome of the Mercians. Medway. As for the river Medweg, now called Medway, and in the British tongue, (unlesse I misse of the truth,) Vaga, whereunto afterward was ad∣ded Med, hath his spring head in the wood Anderida which is termed the Weald, that is a Wood-land country; Weald. and taketh up the South-part of this region farre and wide. Penshurst. At first, whiles it carrieth but a slender streame it receiveth the Eden by Pens∣hurst the seat anciently (as it seemeth by the name) of Sir Stephen de Penherst who al∣so was called de Penshester a famous Warden of the Cinque ports; but now the house of the Sidneies who derive their race from William de Sidney Chamberlaine to King Henrie the second: Sidney. out of which came Sir Henrie Sidney that renowned Lord deputy of Ireland, who of the daughter of Iohn Dudley Duke of Northumberland, and Earle of Warwicke, begat Philip and Robert. This Robert, Iames our soveraigne King, made right honorable, Vicount Lisl first by the title of Baron Sidney of Penshurst and afterwards, of Vi∣count Lisle. But Sir Philip, whom I cannot passe over in silence, beeing the glorious starre of this familie, a lively patterne of vertue, and the lovely joy of all the learned sort, fighting valerously with the enemy before Zutphen in Gelderland died manful∣ly. This is that Sidney, See in Barke shire. Philip Sidney whom, as Gods will was he should be therefore borne into the world, even to shew unto our age a sample of ancient vertues: so his good pleasure was before any man looked for it to call for him againe, and take him out of the world as beeing more worthy of heaven then earth. Thus wee may see, Perfect ver∣tue sodainely vanisheth out of sight, and the best men continue not long. Then the river Medway, branching it selfe into five streamlets, is joyned with as many stone Bridges, and thereof giveth the name of Tunbridge to the towne there situate, as the towne of Bridges. This about King William Rufus his time Richard sonne of Count Gilbert ; Tunbridge. Grandchild to Godfrey Earle of Ewe, & Lord of Briony obtained in requitall for Briony in Normandie, when there had bin long debate about Briony. This Richard, (as William Gemeticensis writeth) in recompence for the same castle received in England the towne of Tunbridge for it. And the report goeth, that the The Lowy of Tunbridge. Lowy of Briony was measured round about with a line, and with the same line brought into England, hee received so much groūd measured out at Tunbridge. Shortly after, he built here a faire large castle fenced with the river, a deepe ditch, and strong walles; and albeit it is now ruinous and Keepe attired with Ivie, * yet it manifestly sheweth what it was. His posteritie, who were Earles of Glocester, and surnamed De Clare, (for that they were Lords of Clare in Suffolke) built here a priorie for Chanons of Saint Augustines order, founded the parish Church which was impropriated to the Knights of Saint Iohn of Hierusa∣lem, and compounded about the tenure of the Mannour, for which there had beene long suit, to hold it of the Archbishop of Canterburie by Knights fee, and to be their high Stewards at their inthronizations. From these Clares Earles of Glocester, it came by an heire generall to Sir Hugh Audley Earle of Glocester, and by his onely daughter to the Earles of Stafford, who were afterward Dukes of Buckingham, & from them by attainder to the Crowne. It hath in latter ages beene beholden to Sir An∣drew Iude of London for a faire free-Schoole, and to Iohn Wilford for a causey toward London. Three miles directly South from hence in the very limit of Sussex, and neere Frant, I saw in a white-sandy ground divers vastie, craggie stones of strange formes, whereof two of the greatest stand so close together, and yet severed with so straight a line, Whet-stones. as you would thinke they had beene sawed asunder, and Nature when she reared these, might seeme sportingly to have thought of a Sea. But to returne to the River. From Tunbridge, Medway passeth by Haudelo, from whence came that Iohn Hau∣delo, who happily marrying the heire of the Lord Burnell, had issue by her a sonne, who was called Nicholas, summoned to Parliament among the Barons by the name of Burnell. Then Medway increased with another water, called Twist, which twi∣steth about and insulateth a large plot of good ground, Mereworth. runneth on not farre from Mereworth, where stands a faire Castle like house, which from the Earles of Arun∣dell came unto the Nevils Lords of Abergevennie, and Le Despencer: whose heire in the right line, is Marie, Ladie Fane, unto whom, and her heires King Iames in the first Parliament that he held, Vagniacae. restored, gave and granted, &c. the name, stile, title, honour, and dignitie of Baronesse le Despencer: & that her heires successively should be Barons le De∣spencer for ever. Now by this time Medway having received a rivelet, that looseth it selfe under ground, and riseth againe at Loose, serving thirteene fulling-mills, hast∣neth to Maidstone, which seeing the Saxons called it Medwegston, & , I beleeve verily it is the same VAGNIACAE, which Antonine the Emperor mentio∣neth, and Ninnius in his Catalogue of cities, calleth corruply, Caer Megwad, for, Med∣wag. Neither verily doth the account of distance disagree; From Noviomagus one way, and Durobrovis another, whereof I shall treat anone. Under the latter Emperours, as is to be seene in Peutegerus his table lately set out by M. Velserus, it is named MA∣DVS. Thus as yeeres by litlte and little turne about, so names likewise by little and little become changed. Madus. A large faire, and sweet towne this is, and populous: for the faire stone bridge, it hath been beholding to the Archbishops of Canterbury. Among whom to grace this place at the confluence of the waters, Boniface of Savoy, built a a small Colledge, Iohn Vfford raised a palace for himselfe and successors, which Simon Islip encreased, and betweene them, which it standeth in plight, William Courtney ere∣cted a faire Collegiat Church, in which he so great a Prelate, and so high borne, lieth lowly entombed. One of the two common Gaoles or prisons of the whole County is here appointed. And it hath beene endowed with sundrie priviledges, by King Edward the sixt, incorporated by the name of Major and Iurates, all which in short time they lost by favouring rebels. But Queene Elizabeth amply restored them, and their Major, whereas anciently they had a Portgreve for their head Magistrate. This I note, because this [ Greve ] is an ancient Saxon word, and as yet among the Germans signifieth, a Ruler, as Markegrave, Reingrave, Landgrave, &c. Here, a little beneath Maidstone Eastward, a prety rivelet joyneth with Medway, springing first at Leneham: which towne by probable conjecture is the very same that Antonine the Emperour calleth DVROLENVM, Len h written amisse in some copies▪ DVROLEVUM. For Durolenum in the British language, is as much to say as The water Lenum. And besides the remaines of the name, the distance also from DV∣ROVENVM, and DVROBROVIS proveth this to be Durolenum: to say nothing of the scituation therof, neere unto that high rode way of the Romans, which in old time (as Higden of Chester doth write) led from Dover through the midst of Kent. Hard by, Bocton M l∣herb▪ at Bocton Malherb hath dwelt a long time the family of the Wottons, out of which in our remembrance flourished both Nicolas Wotton, Doct. of the lawes, who being of the Privy counsell to K. Henry the Eight, K. Edward the sixth, Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth, sent in Embassage nine times to forreine Princes, and thrice chosen a Committè about peace between the English, French, and Scottish; lived a goodly time, and ran a long race in this life with great commendation of piety and wisedome: and also Sir Edward Wotton, Baron Wot∣ton. whom for his approved wisedome in waightie affaires, Q. Eli∣zabeth made Controller of her house, and K. Iames created Baron Wotton of Merlay. Here under is Vlcomb anciently a mansiō of the family De sancto Leodegario, corruptly called Sentleger & Sellenger, & Motinden, where Sir R. Rockesly descended from Kriol, and Crevecur built a house, who held lands at Seaton by serjeantie to be Vantrarius Re∣gis, when the K. goeth into Gascoin, Fin. Mich. xi. E. 2. donec perusus fuerit pari solutarum pretii. 4. d. which as they that understand Law Latin (for I do not) translate that he should be the Kings fore-foot-man, until he had worn out a paire of shooes, prized 4. d. Neither hath this river any other memorable thing nere to it, Leeds castle. The family Crevequer. but Leeds Castle, built by the noble Creve∣quers, who in ancient charters are named de Crevequer, & De crepito corde: afterwards it was the unfortunate seat of Bartholomew L. Baldismer, who perfidiously fortified it against K. EDVVARD the second, who had freely given it him, and after that payed the due price of his disloyaltie upon the gallowes. The whole matter you may reade here if you list out of a briefe historie penned by Thomas de la More, a gentleman that lived at the same time, and which of late I did publish in print. In the yeare 1521. Queene Isabel came to the Castle of Leeds, about the feast of Saint Michael; minding there to lodge all night, but was not permitted to enter in. The King offended hereat, as taking it to be done in contempt of him, called certaine of the neighbour inhabitants out of Essex and Lon∣don, and commanded them to lay siege unto the Castle. Now, there held the Castle at that time Bartholomew de Baldismer, who having left therein his wife and sonnes, was gone him∣selfe with the rest of the Barons to overthrow the Hughs de Spencer. Meane-while, when they that were inclosed within despaired of their lives, the Barons with their associats came as farre as Kingston, and by the mediation of the Bishops of Canterbury and London, to∣gether with the Earle of Pembroch, requested that the King would remove his siege, promi∣sing to deliver up the Castle, into the Kings hand after the next Parliament. But the King considering well, that the besieged could not long hold out, nor make resistance, being highly displeased & angred at their cōtumacy, would not give eare to the Barons petitions. And when they had turned their journey another way, hee afterward forced the Castle with no small trouble and labour about it: and when he had hanged all the rest that he found therein, he sent the wife and sonnes of Bartholmew aforesaid to the Tower of London. * Thus Medway having received this rivelet from Leeds, fetching about through good grounds rūneth by Al∣lington, sometime a castle, now lesse than a castellet, where Sir T. Wyat the elder, a wor∣thy learned knight, reedified a faire house now decaied, whose son S r . Thomas enriched by an heire of Sir T. Haut, proposing to himself great hopes upō fair pretēses pitifully overthrew himself & his state. Ailesford. Hence commeth Medway to Ailsford in the old English Saxon , which H. of Huntingdon, calleth Elstre, Ninnius Episford: who hath written, that it was named in the British tongue Saissenaeg haibail of the Saxons there vanquished, like as others in the very same sense termed it Anglesford. For, Guorte∣mere the Britaine, Guortigerns sonne, did here set upon Hengist and the English Sax∣ons, whom being disraied, and not able to abide a second charge, he put all to flight: so as they had beene utterly defeated for ever, but that Hengist skil-full and provident to prevent, and divert danger, withdrew himselfe into the Isle of Tenet, untill that in∣vincible vigour and heat of the Britanes were allaied, Horsted. and fresh supplies came to his succour out of Germanie. In this Battaile were slaine the Generalls of both sides, Catigern the Britaine, Catigern his Sepulchre. and Horsa the Saxon: of whom the one, buried at Horsted not farre from hence, gave name to the place: and Catigern hono∣red with a stately and solemne funerall is thought to have beene enterred neere unto Ailesford where under the side of a hill I saw foure huge, rude, hard stones erected, two for the sides, one transversall in the middest betweene them, and the hugest of all piled and laied over them in manner of the British monu∣ment which is called Stone heng but not so artificially with mortis and tenents. Verily the unskilfull common people terme it at this day, of the same Catigern, Keiths or Kits Coty house. In Ailsford it selfe, for the religious house of the Carmelites founded by Richard Lord Grey of Codnor in the time of King Henrie the Third, is now seene a faire habitation of Sir William Siddey a learned Knight, painefully, and expensfully studious of the common good of his country as both his endowed house for the poore, and the bridge heere with the common voice doe plentifully testifie. Boxley. Neither is Boxley neere adjoyning to bee passed over in silence, where William de Ipres, in Flaunders, Earle of Kent founded an Abbey in the yeare of our Lord 1145. Wrotham. and translated thither the Monkes, from Clarevalle in Burgundie. Medway having wound himselfe higher, from the East receiveth a brooke spring∣ing neare Wrotham or Wirtham, Malling. so named for plentie of wortes: where the Arch∣bishops had a place untill Simon Islep pulled it downe; leaveth Malling which grew to bee a towne after Gundulph Bishop of Rochester had there founded an Abbey of Nunnes, Leibourn. and watereth Leibourn which hath a Castle sometime the seate of a family thereof surnamed, out of which Sir Roger Leibourn was a great Agent in the Barons warres, Baron Lei∣bourn. Briling. Baron Say. and William was a Parliamentary Baron in the time of King Edward the first. Neare neighbour to Leibourn is Briling, now the habitation of the Lord Abergeveny, in times past parcell of the Baronie of the Maminots, then of the Saies, whose Inheri∣tance at length by heires generall came to the families of Clinton, Fienes, and Aulton. Upon the banke of Medway Eastward somewhat higher, after it hath passed by Hal∣ling where Hamo Heath Bishop of Rochester built an house for his successors, there standeth an ancient Citie; Durobrevis. which Antonine calleth DVRO BRVS, DVRO-BRIVAE and in another place more truely DVRO PROVae and DVRO BROVae: Bede DVRO BREVIS: In an ancient table set forth by Welser. Roibis. and in the declining state of the Romane Empire, processe of time contracted his name so, that it came to be named ROIBIS, and so by addition of , which commeth of the latin word Castrum, betokeneth among our ances∣tors a city or Castle, Ceaster what it is. Rochester. was called , and now with us more short Rochester, and in Latin Roffa, of one Rhufus as Bede guesseth: but it seemeth unto mee to retaine in it somewhat still of that old name Durobrevis. Neither is there cause why any man should doubt of the name, seeing that by the account of journies, or distance betweene places, and Bedes authoritie, it is named expressely in the Charter of the foundation of the Cathedrall Church there DVROBROVIS: yet thus much I would advertise the Reader, that in the printed bookes of Bede it is read Darueruum, whereas in the manuscript copies it is termed DVROBREVIS: seated it is in a bottome, fortified on the one side with a marsh, the river, the weake walles, and as William of Malmesburie saith, pent within too streight a roome: whereupon, in time past it was counted a Castle rather then a Citie. For, Bede calleth it Castellum Cantuariorum, that is, the Kentishmens Castle. But now it stretcheth forth with large suburbs on the West, East, and South sides. It hath passed through no few dangers and mischances. In the yeare of Christ 676. it was overthrowne and laid along by King Aetheldred the Mercian: and many a time afterward sacked by the Danes. Aethelbert King of Kent erected there a sumptuous Church, which also he made more famous with the dignitie of Bishopricke, ordaining Iustus to bee the first Bishop of that See. But when it fell to decay for very age, Bishop Gundulph a Norman about the yeare 1080. reedified it, and thrusting out the Priests brought in Monkes in their roomes: and when they were cast out, a Deane, sixe Prebendaries and Scholars were substituted in their places. Neere unto the Church there standeth over the river an old Castle fortified both by art, and situation: Which, as the report goeth Odo Bishop of Bay∣eux and Earle of Kent built: But it was, no doubt, King William the first that built it: For in Domesday booke we read thus, The Bishop of Rouecester holdeth in Elesford, for exchange of the land on which the Castle is seated. Yet, certaine it is, that Bishop Odo when his hope depended of a doubtfull change of the State, held this against King William Rufus: At which time there passed proclamation through England, that whosoever would not be reputed a Niding, should repaire to recover Rochester Castle. Whereupon the youth fearing that name, * and most reproachfull and opprobrious in that age, Niding. William of Malmesbury. swarmed thither in such numbers, that Odo was enforced to yeeld the place, lose his dignitie, and abjure the realme. But concerning the reedification of this Castle about this time, listen what the Textus Rof∣fensis. An antient Manuscript booke of that church. Text of Rocester saith, when King William the second would not confirme the gift of Lanfrank as touching the Manour of Hedenham in the County of Buckingham, made unto Rochester church, unlesse Lanfranck and Gundulph Bi∣shop of Rochester would give unto the King an hundred pound of deniers; At last by the in∣tercession of Sir Robert Fitz Hamon and Henry Earle of Warwick, the King granted it thus farre forth in lieu for the money which hee demanded for grant of the Manour, that Bishop Gundulph, because he was very skilfull and well experienced in architecture and masonrie should build for the King at his owne proper charges a Castle of stone. In the end, when as the Bishops were hardly brought to give their consent unto it before the King, Bishop Gundulph built up the Castle full and whole at his owne cost. And a little after, King Henrie the first granted unto the Church of Canterbury and to the Archbishops, the keeping thereof, and the Constableship to hold ever after, (as Florentius of Worcester saith) yea and licence withall, to build in the same a towre for themselves. Since which time it was belaied with with one or two great sieges, but then especially, when the Barons with their Al'armes made all England to shake, and Simon Montford Earle of Leicester assaulted it most fiercely, though in vaine, and cut downe the wooden bridge, which was after repai∣red. But in the time of King Richard the Second, * Sir Robert Knowles by warlike prowes raised from low estate to high reputation, The French called him Canol. and great riches, built a very good∣ly stone bridge of arch-work with money levied out of French spoiles. At the end of the said bridge, Sir Iohn Cobham who much furthered the worke, erected a Chapell (for our elders built no notable bridge without a chapell) upon which besides armes of Saints, are seen the armes of the King and his three uncles then living. And long af∣ter Archbishop Watham coped a great part of the said bridge with iron bars. Vnder this, Medway swelling with a violent and swift streame strugleth and breaketh through roaring and loud; but forthwith running more still and calme becommeth a road at Gillingham and Chetham for a most royall and warlike navy of strong and service∣able ships, and the same most ready alwaies at a short warning: which, our late gra∣cious Ladie Queene Elizabeth, with exceeding great cost built for the safegard of her subjects and terror of her enemies; The Kings Navy. and for the defence thereof raised a castelet at Vpnore upon the river side. Now Medway growne more full and carying a greater breadth, with his curling waves right goodly and pleasant to behold, Toliatis an Isle. runneth a long by the fruitfull fields, un∣till that being divided by meeting with Iland Shepey, (which wee supposed to bee Ptolemeis TOLIATIS) maketh his issue into the Aestuarie or Frith of Thames at two mouthes. Of which twaine, the Westerne is called West-Swale: the Easterne, that see∣meth to have severed Sheppey from the firme land, Shepey. Iu. et. is named East-Swale: but by Bede, termed Genlad and Yenlet. This Isle, of the sheepe, whereof it feedeth mighty great flockes, being called by our ancestours Shepey, that is, The Isle of Sheep, passing plenti∣full in corne, but scarse of woods containeth twentie one miles in compasse. Vpon the North-shore it had a little Monasterie, (now they call it Minster) built by Sexbur∣ga wife of Ercombert the King of Kent, in the yeare of 710. Vnder which, a certaine Brabander of late beganne to trie by the furnace out of stones found upon the shore, both Brimstone and Coperas. It hath Westward in the Front thereof a very fine and strong Castle, which King Edward the third built, as himselfe writeth, Pleasant for site, to the terrour of his enemies, and solace of his people: unto which hee adjoyned a Burgh, and in the honour of Philip the Queene his wife called it Queene-borough, as one would say, Queene Borough. The Queens Burgh. The Constable whereof at this day, is Sir Edward Hoby, who hath polished his excellent wit with learned studies. Eastward, is Shur∣land seated, which belonged in late times to the Cheineies, and now to Sir Philip Herbert second sonne to Henry Earle of Pembroch, whom King Iames in one and the same day created Baron Herbert of Shurland, and Earle of Mont-Go∣merie. This Isle appertaineth to the Hundred of Middleton, so named of Middleton the towne, now Milton. This was some time a towne of the Kings aboade, and of greater name by farre than at this day, although, Hasting the Danish pirate for to annoy it, fortified a Castle hard by in the yeare 893. Neere adjoyning heereto Sitting∣burn a towne furnished with Innes sheweth it selfe with hiw new Major and corpora∣tion: the remaines also of Thong Castle, which as some write, was so called for that Hengist built it by a measure of thongs cut out of a beasts hide, when Vortigern gave so much land to fortifie upon, as hee could encompasse with a beasts hide cut into thongs. Since the conquest it was the seat of Guncelline of Baldismer, of noble parentage, whose sonne Bartholomew begat Guncelline: and hee by the Inheretrie of Raulph Fitz-Barnard Lord of Kings-Downe was father to that seditious Sir Bartholo∣mew Lord Baldismer of whom I spake: he againe of Margaret Clare begat Sir Giles Lord Baldismer that died without issue; also Margerie, wife to William Roos of Hamlake; Maude the wife of Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford; Elizabeth espoused to William Bohun Earle of Northampton, and afterward to Edmund Mortimer ; and Margaret whom Sir Iohn Tiptoft wedded: from whom descended a goodly of-spring and faire race of great nobilitie. Then saw I Tenham not commended for health, Tenham. but the parent as it were of all the choise fruit gardens, and Orchards of Kent, and the most large and delightsome of them all, planted in the time of King Henrie the Eighth by Rich. Harris his fruterer, to the publike good. Chery gar∣dens. For thirty Parishes thereabout, are replenished with Cherie-gardens, and Orchards beautifully disposed in direct lines. Amongst these is Fever∣sham very commodiously situate. Feversham. For, the most plentifull part of this countrey lieth round about it, and it hath a creeke fit for bringing in and carrying forth commodi∣ties; whereby at this day it flourisheth amongst all the neighbour townes. It seemeth also in former times to have flourished, considering that King Aethelstane assem∣bled hither an assembly the Sages of his Kingdome, and made lawes heere in the yeare of our redemption 903. King Stephen also he that usurped the Kingdome of England, founded an Abbey heere, for the Monkes of Clugny ; In which, himselfe, Maude his wife, and Eustach his sonne were entombed. Nigh thereto, like as else where through this Countie, are found pits of great depth, which being narrow in the mouth and very spatious beneath have their certaine distinct roomes or chambers (as it were) with their se∣verall supporting pillers of chalke. Concerning these there are divers opinions. I for my part, cannot tell what to thinke of them unlesse they were those pits, out of which the Britaines in old time digged forth chalke or white marle to dung their grounds withall, as Plinie writeth. For, they sound pits, saith hee, An hundred foote deepe, streight at the mouth, but of great capacitie within: like unto these very same of which we now speake. And verily, no where else are they found but in a chalkie and marly soile. Vn∣lesse a man would thinke, that our English-Saxons digged such caves and holes to the same use and purpose, as the Germans did, of whom they were descended. For, they were wont as Tacitus writeth, Pits made in Kent. to make holes and caves under the ground, and those to charge aloft with great heapes of dung, as harbours of refuge for Winter, and garners of receit for corne; because by such like places they mitigate the rigour of cold wether: and if at any time the enemie commeth, hee wasteth onely the open ground: but as for those things that lie hidden and buried under the earth, they are either unknowne, or in this respect doe disappoint the enemies, for that they are to be sought for. From above Feversham, * the shoare runneth on, plentifull of shel-fish, but especi∣ally oisters, Reculver. Regulbium. (whereof there are many pits, or stewes) as far as Reculver, and farther. This Reculver, is a place of ancient memorie, named in the old English-Saxon Reaculf, but in elder time REGVLBIVM. For so it is named, in the Roman Office booke Notitia Provinciarum ; which reporteth that the captaine of the primer band of the Vetasians lay heere in garrison under the Lieutenant of the Saxon-shoare: (for so was the sea coast a-long this tract called) who had the command then of nine Ports, as the L. Warden now hath of five Ports. And verily the Roman Emperours coines digged up there give testimony to this antiquitie of the place: In it Aethelbert King of Kent when he had made a grant of Canterbury to Augustine the Monk, built him∣selfe a Palace, and Bassa an English-Saxon beatified it with a Monasterie, out of which Brightwald the Eighth Archbishop of Canterbury was elected. Of this Mona∣stery, or Minster it was named Raculf-Minster, what time as Edred brother to King Edward the Elder gave it to Christ-church in Canterbury. Howbeit, at this day it is nothing else but an uplandish country towne, and if it bee of any name, it hath it for the salt savory Oisters there dredged, and for that Minster; the steeples whereof shoo∣ting up their loftie spires stand the Mariners in good stead, as markes, whereby they avoide certaine sands and shelves in the mouth of the Thames. For, as he Hadrian Iunius. versifieth in his Philippeis. Cernit oloriferum Thamisin sua Doridi amarae. Flumina miscentem— It now beholds swann-breeding Thames, Stoure river. where he doth mix his streame With brackish sea— Now are we come to the Isle Tanet, which the river Stour, by Bede named Want∣sum, severeth from the firme land by a small channell running betweene, which river made of two divers rivelets in the wood-land called the Weald, so soone as it goeth in one entire streame, visiteth Ashford and Wye, Ashford. Wie. two prety Mercate townes well knowne: Either of them had sometimes their severall Colledges of Priests: the one built by Iohn Kemp Archbishop of Canterbury, who was there borne: the other to wit of Ashford, by Sir R. Fogge Knight. Wye also had a speciall fountaine, into which God infused a wonderfull gift and vertue at the instant prayer of Eustace a Norman Abbat, Page 4157. if we may beleeve Roger of Hoveden, whom I would advise you to have re∣course unto if you take delight in such like miracles. As how the blind by drinking thereof recovered sight, the dumbe their speech, the deafe their hearing, the lame their limbes. And how a woman possessed of the devill, sipping thereof vomited two toades which immediately were first transformed into huge blacke dogs, and againe into asses: and much more no lesse strange than ridiculous, which some in that age as easily belie∣ved, as others falsely forged. Chilham. Thence the Stour leaving East-well the inhabitation of the family of the Finches, worshipfull of it selfe, and by descent from Philip Bel∣knap, and Peoplesham: goeth on to Chilham, or, as other call it Iulham, where are the ruines of an old Castle, Fulbert of Dover. which one Fulbert of Dover is reported to have built: whose issue male soone failed, and ended in a daughter inheritrice, whom Richard the base sonne of King Iohn tooke to wife, and had with her this Castle and the lands thereto belonging: Of her hee begat two daughters; namely Lora the wife of VVilliam Marmion, and Isabell wife first to David of Strath∣bolgy Earle of Athole in Scotland, afterward to Sir Alexander Baliol who was called to Parliament by the name of Lord of Chilham: & mother to that Iohn Earle of Athole, 1306. who being condemned oftentimes for treason was hanged at the last upon a gibbet fifty foot high (as the King commanded because he might be so much the more conspicuous in mens eies, as he was of higher and nobler birth) and being cut downe halfe alive, had his head smitten off, and the truncke of his body throwen in∣to the fire, a very cruell kinde of punishment and seldome seene among us. And af∣ter his goods were confiscate, King Edward the first bounteously bestowed this castle together with Fel-bo∣rough. Felebergh Hundred upon Sir Bartholomew Badilsmer ; who likewise quickly lost the same, for his treason, as I have before related. There is a constant report among the inhabitants, that Iulius Caesar in his second voiage against the Bri∣tans encamped at this Chilham, and that thereof it was called As we call Iu∣liana, Gilian. Iulham, that is, Iulius his Mansion: and if I be not deceived, they have the truth on their side. For heere a∣bout it was when at his second remove, he in his march staied upon the intelligence that his ships were sore weather-beaten, and thereupon returned and left his army encamped tenne daies while he rigged and repaired the decaies of his Navy. And in his march from hence, was encountered sharply by the Britans, and lost with many o∣ther Laberius Durus a Marshall of the field. Laberias Durus a Tribune. A little beneath this towne there is a pre∣ty hillocke to be seene apparelled in a fresh suit of greene sord, where men say, many yeeres agoe one Iullaber was enterred, whom some dreame to have beene a Giant, others, a Witch. But I conceiving an opinion that some antiquity lieth hidden un∣der that name, doe almost perswade my selfe, that the foresaid Laberius was heere bu∣ried, and so that the said hillocke became named Iul-laber. Five miles from hence the river Stoure dividing his Channell, runneth swiftly by DVROVERNVM the chiefe Cittie of this Countie and giveth it his name. Durovernum. For Durwhern in the Welsh. British tongue signifieth a swift river: Ptolome calleth it in steed of Durovernum, DARVERNVM, Bede and others DOROBERNIA, the English Saxons , that is, The Kentishmens citie: Ninnius and the Britans Caer Kent, Canterbury. that is, the Citie of Cent, wee, Canterbury, and the later writers in Latine Can∣tuaria. A right antient citie this is, and famous, no doubt in the Romans time: not over great (as William of Malmesbury said, 400. yeares since) nor verie small: much renow∣ned both for the situation, and exceeding fertility of the soile adjoining, as also for the walles whole and undecaied enclosing it round about, by reason likewise of the rivers watering it, and commodiousnesse of woods there about, besides the vicinity of the sea, yeelding store of fish to serve it. Augustine the Apostle of the Englishmen. Whiles the Saxons Heptarchie flourished, it was the head citie of the kingdome of Kent and the kings seat; untill such time as king Ethelbert passed a grant of it together with the roialty thereof unto Augustin the Apostle as they called him, and consecrated Archbishop of the English Nation, who established heere his habitation for himselfe and his successors. And albeit the Metropolitan dignity, to∣gether with the honour of the Pall (that is an Episcopall vestiment that was comming over the shoulders, made of a sheepe skin, in memoriall of him that sought the stray sheepe, and having found the same laid it upon his shoulders, wrought and embroydered with crosses, first laied upon Saint Peters coffin or shrine) was ordai∣ned by Saint Gregorie the Great then Pope, Pall what it is. to bee at London, yet for the honour of Augustine it was translated hither. For, Kenulph King of the Mercians thus writeth unto Pope Leo. Because Augustine of blessed Memorie, the minister of Gods word unto the English Nation, Anno. 7093. and who most gloriously governed the Churches of English Saxonie, departed this life in the Cittie of Canterburie, and his bodie was there buried in the Minster of Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles, the which Laurence his successours consecrated, it hath pleased all the wise men of our nation, that the Metropolitane honour should bee conferred upon that Citie where his bodie was entombed, who engraffed in these parts the veritie of Christian faith. But whether the Archbishops See and Metropolitan dignity were here ordeined by authority of the wise men of our nation (that is to say) the States of the Parliament, (to speake according to our time) or by Augustine him selfe whiles hee lived, as others would have it: the Bishops of Rome, who next followed establi∣shed the same so, as they decreed, That to have it severed and taken away from thence was an abominable act punishable with Curse and hell-fire. Since which time, it is in∣credible, how much it hath flourished, in regard both of the Archiepiscopal dignity, and also of that schoole of the better kind of literature which Theodore the seventh Arch∣bishop erected there. And albeit it was sore shaken with the Danish wars, and con∣sumed for a great part thereof sundrie times by casualtie of fire, yet rose it up alwaies againe more beautifull and glorious then before. After the Normans entrie into this land when King William Rufus, as it was re∣corded in the Register of Saint Augustines Abbey, Had given the Citie of Canterburie wholly in * fee simple unto the Bishops, which before time they had held at the Kings courtesie onely, it begun not onely to get heart againe, what through the same of the religious piety of godly men there, and what through the bounty of the Bishops, and especi∣ally of Simon Sudbury, who rebuilt up the walls new; but grew also as it were upon a sodaine to such a state, that for beauty of private dwelling houses it equalled all the cities of Britaine, but for the magnificent and sumptuous building of religious pla∣ces and the number of them, it surpassed even those that were most famous. A∣mong which, two especially surmounted all; Christs-church, and Saint Augustines, both of them replenished with Monkes of the Order of Saint Benet. And as for Christ-Church, it raiseth it selfe aloft neare the heart of the Citie, with so great a majestie and statelinesse, that it striketh a sensible impression of religion into their minds that behold it a farre off. This Church built in old time, as Beda saith, by the faithfull and believing Romans, the same Augustine of whom I spake, got into his hands, consecrated it to Christ, and assigned it to be the seat for his successors: wherein 73. Archbishops in a continued traine of succession have now set. Of whom Lanfranke, and William Corboyle brought the upper part of the Church, and they that succeeded, the nethermore, (where as that the more ancient worke had beene con∣sumed with fire) to that statelinesse which now wee see not without exceeding great charges, which a devout perswasion in former times willingly disbursed. For, a number of high, of low, and of meane degree flocked hither in pilgrimage with very great and rich oblations to visit the tombe of Thomas Becket the Archbishop: who being slaine in this Church by Courtiers, for that in maintaining of the Ecclesi∣asticall liberties, hee had stubbornly opposed himselfe against the King, was matri∣culated a holy Martyr by the Bishop of Rome, and worshipped as a Saint, and his shrine so loaden with great offerings, that the meanest part of it, was of pure gold, So bright, so shining and glittering, as Erasmus (who saw it) saith, was every corner with rare and exceeding big precious stones: yea, and the Church all round about did abound with more than princelike riches: and as though Christs name to whom it was dedicated, had beene quite forgotten, it came to be called Saint Thomas Church. Neither was it for any thing else so famous, as for his memoriall and sepulture, although it may justly vaunt of many famous mens tombs and monuments: especially, that of Edward sur∣named The Blacke Prince of Wales, a most worthy and renowned Knight for warlike prowesse, and the very wonder of his age: also of Henry the Fourth, a most puissant King of England. But Henry the Eighth scattered this wealth heaped up together in so many ages, and dispersed those Monkes: in lieu of whom were placed in this Christs-Church, a Deane, an Archdeacon, Prebendaries twelve, and Sixe Preachers, who in places adjoyning round about should teach and preach the word of God. The o∣ther Church that alwaies mightily strove with this for superioritie, stood by the Ci∣ties side Eastward, knowne by the name of Saint Austines: which Augustine him∣selfe, and King Ethelbert at his exhortation, founded and dedicated to Saint Peter and Paul: that it might be the Sepulture place, both for the Kings of Kent, and also for the Archbishops; (For, as yet it was not lawfull to bury within Cities) and endowed it with infinite riches, granting unto the Abbat a Mint-house with priviledge to coine money. And now, at this day, notwithstanding the greatest part thereof is bu∣ried under his owne ruines, and the rest were converted to the Kings house, yet it sheweth manifestly to the beholders how great a thing it was. Augustine himselfe was enterred in the porch of the same, with this Epitaph, as witnesseth Thomas Spot. Inclytus Anglorum praesulpius, & decus altum, Hîc Augustinus requiescit corpore sanctus. The bodie of Saint Augustine doth here interred lie: A Prelate great, devout also, and Englands honor hie. But, as Bede reporteth, who rather is to be credited, this was the more ancient In∣scription of his tombe. HIC REQVIESCIT DOMINVS AVGVSTINVS DOROVERNENSIS ARCHIEPISCOPVS PRIMVS, QVI OLIM HVC A BEATO GREGORIO RO∣MANAE VRBIS PONTIFICE DIRECTVS, ET A DEO OPERATIONE MIRA∣CVLORVM SVFFVLTVS, ET ETHELBERTHVM REGEM AC GENTEM ILLIVS AB IDOLORVM CVLTV AD FIDEM CHRISTI PERDVXIT, ET COMPLETIS IN PACE DIEBVS OFFICII SVI DEFVNCTVS EST SEPTIMO KALENDAS IV∣NIAS, EODEM REGE REGNANTE. HERE RESTETH DAN. AVGVSTINE, THE FIRST ARCHBISHOP OF CAN∣TERBURY: VVHO BEING IN TIMES PAST DIRECTED HITHER FROM BLES∣SED GREGORIE THE BISHOP OF ROME, AND THROVGH THE VVORKING OF MIRACLES SVPPORTED BY GOD, BOTH BROVGHT KING ETHELBERT AND HIS PEOPLE FROM IDOLATRY TO THE FAITH OF CHRIST, AND AL∣SO AFTER THE DAIES OF HIS FVNCTION ACCOMPLISHED IN PEACE, DIED THE SEVENTH DAY BEFORE THE KALENDS OF IVNE, IN THE SAME KINGS REIGNE. Together with him in the same porch were buried sixe Archbishops next succee∣ding, and in memoriall of these seven namely, Austen, Laurence, Mellitus, Iustus, Honorius, Deus-dedit, and Theodosius, were these verses (such as they are) engraven there in marble: SEPTEM SVNT ANGLIS PRIMATES ET PROTO PATRES, SEPTEM RECTORES, SEPTEM COELOQVE TRIONES; SEPTEM CISTERNAE VITAE, SEPTEMQVE LVCERNAE; ET SEPTEM PALMAE REGNI, SEPTEMQVE CORONAE, SEPTEM SVNT STELLAE, QUAS HAEC TENET AREA CELLAE. Seven Patriarchs of England, Primates seven: Seven Rectors, and seven Labourers in heaven. Seven Cesternes pure of life, seven Lamps of light Seven Palmes, and of this Realme seven Crownes full bright, Seven Starres, are heere bestow'd in vault below. I may not forget another Church neere unto this, built as Bede saith, by the Ro∣mans and consecrated to Saint Martin, wherein, before Austens comming, Bertha wife to King Ethelbert, descended from the bloud Royall of France was wont to fre∣quent divine Christian service. Concerning the Castle on the South side of the Ci∣tie, the Bulwarks whereof now are decaied, it maketh no shew of any great antiquity, and there is no memorable thing thereof come to my knowledge, but only that it was built by the Normans: as touching the dignitie of the See of Canterburie, which in times past carried a great State, I will say nothing but this, that, as in former ages, during the Roman Hierarchie, the Archbishops of Canterbury were Primates of all Britaine, Legates to the Pope, and as Vrbane the second said, The Patriarches, as it were, of another world: so when the Popes authoritie was abrogated, a decree passed in the Synode, Anno, 1534. that laying aside the said title, they should bee stiled Primates and Metropolitanes of all England. Which dignitie the right reverend Father in Christ D. Iohn Whitgift lately held, who devoutly consecrated both his whole life to God, & all his painefull labours to the Church, and in the yeare 1604. slept in the Lord, a Pre∣late much missed of all good men: After whom succeeded Doctor Richard Bancroft, a man of singular courage and counsaile, in establishing and supporting the state Ec∣clesiasticall. For the Latitude of Canterbury, the Pole Artick is elevated above the Horizon there fifty one degrees and sixteene minutes, and the Longitude is reckoned to be foure and twenty degrees, and fiftie one minutes. Stour by this time having gathered his waters all into one streame runneth beside Hackington, Hackington. where Dame Lora Countesse of Leicester, a most honou∣rable Lady in those daies, having abandoned all worldly pleasures, sequestred her selfe from the world devoutly, to serve God wholy. Afore which time Baldwin Arch∣bishop of Canterbury began a Church there in the honour of Saint Stephen, and Thomas of Canterbury. But being inhabited by the Bishop of Rome his authoritie, for feare the same might prejudice the Monkes of Canterbury, hee gave over the workes, Saint Ste∣phens. Howbeit ever since, the name remained and the place is called Saint Ste∣phens: of which Sir Roger Manwood Knight, L. cheife Baron of the Exchequer, a man of exquisite knowledge in our common lawes, Fordich. (unto whom for his bounteous liberalitie the poore inhabitants are much beholding) was of late time a right great ornament: * and even so is his sonne at this day Sir Peter Manwood Knight of the Bath, whom I cannot but mention when as he is a favourer of vertue, and learning. From thence Stour passeth by Fordich (called the little Burough of Forewich in King Wil∣liam the Conquerours booke) a place of note for excellent good trouts; The first Eng∣lish Nunne. and so in for∣mer time to Stoure-mouth, which it hath now forsaken a mile, and more; yet left and bequeathed his name to it. But now by Stoure-mouth runneth a brooke which issuing our of Saint Eadburghs well at Liming (where the daughter to King Ethelbert first of our nation tooke the veile) while it seeketh the sea, Elham. seeth Elham a mercate towne of which I have read nothing, but that the Mannour was the inheritance of Iulian Leibourn a Ladie of great honour in her time, Inq. 2. E. 3. who was mother of Laurence Hastings first Earle of Penbrooke of that surname, and after wife to William Clinton Earle of Huntingdon. Then it holdeth his course by divers villages, which thereof receive the addition of Bourn, as Bishops-bourn, Hawles-bourn, Patricks-bourn, and Beakes-bourn. This bourne is that river Stoure as Caesar calleth it (as I have observed travailing lately in these parts) which Caesar came unto, when he had marched by night almost twelve Italian miles from the sea-coast, and where hee had the first encounter, in his second expedition into Britaine; with the Britaines, whom he drave into the woods, where they had a place fortified both by nature, and mens labour, with a number of trees hewen downe and plashed to fore-close the entries, But yet the Romans forced an entrie, Herdes. drave them out, and there about encamped. The place of campe as I heare, is neare H rdes, a place of ancien Gentlement of that surname, descended from Esten grave, Herengod, and the Fitz-Bernards. Belowe Stoure-mouth, Stoure dividing his streame taketh two severall waies, and leaving that name is called In-lade and Wantsume, making the Isle of Tenet on the West and South side: for on all other sides it is washed with the maine Sea. This Iland Solinus named ATHANATON, and in other copies THANATON: the Britaines Iuis Ruhin, as witnesseth Asserius: happily, for Rhutupin, of Rhutupinae a Citie adjoi∣ning. The English Saxons called it , and , and we Tenet. All the Isle standeth upon a whitish maile, full of goodly corne fields, and being a right fertile soile, carrieth in length eight miles, and foure in breadth: reckoned in old time to con∣taine 600. Hides in English. An hides as it is thought con∣sisteth of an hundred acres, called in latine in old time, Familia, Man∣sa and Ma∣nens. Lapis tituli. Families: in stead whereof, it is corruptly read in Bede Milliarium Sex∣centarum, for, Familiarum Sexcentarum. But whereas Solinus writeth that there is not a snake creeping in this Isle, and that the mould or earth carried from hence killeth snakes, it is now proved to bee untrue. That Etymologie therefore derived , that is, from the death of snakes, falleth quite to the ground. Here the English Saxons landed first: here by the permission of Guortigern they first seated themselves: here was their place of refuge; and here Guortimor the Britaine made a great slaughter of them: when, at Lapis Tituli, (for so is that place named in Ninnius which we now call Stouar almost in the same sense, and haven certainely it was) hee put them to flight and forced them with all the speed they might to take their Pinnaces. In which place also, he gave commandement, saith he, that himselfe should bee buried to represse thereby, as he thought, the furious outrages of the English Sax∣ons: in like sort as Scipio Africanus did, who commanded that his tombe should bee so set, Now Elflet. as that it might looke toward Africa: supposing that his verie tombe would be a terror to the Carthaginians. Here also at VVipped fleet, (so called of VVipped the Saxon there slaine) Hengest discomfited the Britaines and put them to flight, after hee had sore tired them with sundry conflicts. S. Austine our Apostle (as they call him) many yeares after landed in this Isle, unto whose blessing the credulous Clergie ascri∣bed the plentifull fertility of the country: and the Monke Gotceline cried out in this manner: 596. Minster. O the land of Tenet, happy by reason of her fertilitie, but most happy for receiving and entertaining so many Divine in-commers bringing God with them, or rather so many heavenly citizens. Egbert the third King of the Kentishmen to pacifie dame Domneva a devout Lady, whom before time he had exceedingly much wronged, granted here a faire piece of land, wherein she errected a Monastery for 70. veiled virgins: the pri∣oresse whereof was Mildred, for her holinesse canonized a Saint, and the Kings of Kent bestowed many faire possessions upon it, but Withred especially, who (that I may note the antiquitie and manner of livery of Seisin in that age out of the very forme of his owne Donation) For the full complement of his confirmation thereof, laied up∣on the holy altar a turfe of that ground which he gave at Humantun. Heere afterward sun∣dry times arrived the Danes who piteously empoverished this Island by robbings and pillages, 1217. and also polluted this Monasterie of Domneva with all kind of cruelty, Lewis of France. that it flourished not againe before the Normans government. Heere also landed Lewis of France, who called in by the tumultuous Barons of England against King Iohn, published by their instigation a pretended right to the Crowne of England. For that whereas King Iohn for his notorious treason against King Richard his brother absent in the Holy-land, was by his Peeres lawfully condemned, and therefore after the death of King Richard the right of the Crowne was devolved to the Queene of Ca∣stile sister to the said King Richard ; Chronicles of W. Thorn. and that shee and her heires had conveied over their right to the said Lewis, and his wife her daughter: Also that King Iohn had forfeited his Kingdome both by the murther of his Nephew Arthur, whereof he was found guilty by his Peeres in France, and also by subjecting his Kingdomes which were alwaies, free to the Pope, as much as in him lay, contrary to his oath at his Coronation, and that without the consent of the Peeres of the Realme, &c. Which I leave to Historians, with the successe of his expedition, least I might seeme to di∣gresse extraordinarily. Neither must I passe over heere in silence, that which maketh for the singular praise of the inhabitants of Tenet, those especially which dwell by the roads or har∣bours of Margate, Ramsgate and Brodstear. For, they are passing industrious, and as if they were Amphibii, that is, both land creatures, and sea creatures, get their living both by sea and land, as one would say with both these elements: they be Fisher-men and Plough-men: as well Husband-men as Mariners: and they that hold the plough∣taile in earing the ground, the same hold the helme in steering the ship. According to the season of the yeare, they knit nets, they fish for Cods, Herrings, Mackarels, &c. they saile, and carry forth Merchandise. The same againe dung and mannure their grounds, Plough, Sow, harrow, reape their Corne and they inne it. Men most ready and well appointed both for sea and land: and thus goe they round and keepe a circle in these their labours. Futhermore whereas that otherwhiles there happen shipwrackes heere, (for there lie full against the shore those dangerous flats, shal∣lowes, shelves, and sands, so much feared of Sailers, which they use to call, The Good∣winsands, The Brakes, Rhutupia. Portu Trutu∣ ensi . The four-foots, The whitdick, &c. ) these men are wont to bestir themselves lustily in recovering both ships, men, and Merchandize endangered. At the mouth of Wantsum Southward, (which men thinke hath changed his chan∣nell) over against the Isle stood a City, which Ptolomee calleth RHVTVPIAN, Taci∣tus, PORTVS TRVTVLENSIS, for Rhutupensis, if Beatus Renanus conjectureth truely: Antonine, RHITVPIS PORTVS, Ammianus Marcellinus, RHVTVPIAH STATIO, that is, the Road of Rhutupiae, Orosius, THE HAVEN and City of Rhutubus: the old English-Saxons as Beda witnesseth, Reptacesler, others Ruptimuth, Alfred of Beverly nameth it Richberge : we at this day, Richborow: Thus hath time sported in varying of one and the same name. Whence this name should arise, it is not for certaine knowen. But seeing the places neere unto it, as Sandwich and Sandiby have their denomination of Sandi: I considering also, that Rhyd Tufith in the British-tongue betokeneth a sandy fourd, I would willingly if I durst, derive it from thence: This City seemed to have beene seated on the descent of an hill, the Castle there stood overlooking from an higher place the Ocean which is now so farre excluded by reason of sandy residence inbealched with the tides, that it comes hardly within a mile of it. Right famous and of great name was this City while the Romans ruled here. From hence was the usual passing out of Britan to France and the Neatherlands at it, the Roman fleets arrived here, it was that Lupicinus sent by The younge Constantius the Em∣perour into Britaine for to represse the rodes and invasions of Scots and Picts both, landed the Heruli, and Batavians, and Maesian regiments. Heere also Theodosius the father of Theodosius the Emperour, to whom as Symmachus witnesseth, the Senate decreed for pacifying Britan armed Statues on horse-backe, arrived with his Herculij, Iovij, Victores & Fidentes, for these were names of Roman regiments. Afterwards when the Saxon Pirates impeached entercourse of merchants and infested our coasts with continuall piracies, the Second Legion Augusta, which being remooved by the Empe∣rour Claudius out of Germany had remained many yeares in Garrison at Caer Leon Isea Silurum in Wales, was translattd hither, and had a Provost of their owne heere under the great Lieutenant and Count of the Saxon shore. Clemens Maximus. Which Provostship happily, that Clemens Maximus bare, who being heere in Britan by the soldiers saluted Emperour, slew Gratian, the lawfull Emperour; and was afterwards himselfe slaine by Theodosius at Aquileia: For, this Maximus it was whom Ausonius in the verses of Aquileia, called the Rhutupine robber. See how these verses are englished in pag. 83. Maximus armigeri quondam sub nomine lixae. Faelix quae tanti spectatrix laeta triumphi, Fudisti Ausonio Rhutupinum Marte latronem. The same Poet also in his Poem Parentalia, preserved the memory of Flavius Sanctus another President or Governour of Rhutupiae, concerning whom thus hee wrote. Militiam nullo qui turbine sedulus egit, Praeside laetatus quo Rhutupinus ager. His martiall service who discharg'd with care without all stirre, And Rutupin rejoyce in him, There bee that under name of Rhi tupine would have all Bri∣tans to be un derstood. who was their governour. Ausonius likewise in a lamentable funerall verse, setteth forth the praise of Claudi∣us Contentus his Vncle, who being overtaken with death left behind him unto stran∣gers a mighty stock of money which hee had put out to usury among the Britaines and encreased by interest; and was heere also enterred. Et patruos Elegia meos reminiscere cantus, Contentum, tellus quem Rhutupina tegit. My dolefull Muse now call to minde the songs of Vnkle mine, Contentus, who enterred lies within mould Rhutupine. This Rhutupiae flourished also after the comming in of the English Saxons. For, wri∣ters record, that it was the Royall Palace of Ethelbert King of Kent; and Bede gave it the name of a City. But ever since, it beganne to decay: neither is the name of it read in any place afterward, as farre as I know, but in Alfred of Beverley, who hath put downe in writing, that Alcher with a power of Kentish-men at this towne, then called Richberge, foiled and defeated the Danes encombered with the spoiles they had before gotten. Now hath time razed out all the footings and tractes thereof, and to teach us that Cities as well as men have their fatall periods, it is a verie field at this daie, wherein when the corne is come uppe a man may see the draughts of streetes crossing one another: (For, wheresoever the streetes went, there the corne is thinne) which the common people terme Saint Augustins Crosse. And there remaine onely certaine walles of a Castle of rough flinte, and long Britan brickes in forme of a quadrant and the same cemented with lime, and a most stiffe binding sand, mightily strengthened by tract of time, so that the cement is as hard as the stone. Over the entrie whereof is fixed a head of a personage en∣graven in stone, some say it was Queene Berthas head, but I take it to bee a Romane worke, a man would deeme this to have beene the Citadell or keepe of the City, it stands on such a height over-looking the low grounds in Tenet, which the Ocean by little and little shrinking away hath now left. Moreover, the plot whereon the Citie stood, being now plowed up, doth oftentimes discover peeces of Romane coines as well gold as silver, evident tokens of the antiquity thereof: and a little be∣neath shee sheweth a daughter of hers, which the English Saxons of sand called , Sandwich. and wee, Sandwich. This beeing one of the Cinque-ports, as they terme them, is on the North and West side, fortified with walles and on other parts fenced with a rampier, river and ditch. The haven by reason of sand choaking it, and a great shippe of burden belonging to Pope Paule the Fourth, which was acci∣dentallie sunke in the verie channell thereof, is not deepe enough to beare any tall vessells. In ancient times it sundrie times felt the furious forces of the Danes, after∣ward King Canutus the Dane when hee had gained the Crowne of England, be∣stowed it upon Christs-Church in Canterburie with the royaltie of the water on each side, * so farre forth as a shippe beeing a floate, a man might cast a Danish hatchet out of the vessell to the banke. In the Norman raigne it was reckoned one of the Cinque ports, and to finde five shippes. In the yeare 1217. Lewis of France of whom wee spake lately, Escaetria. 23. E. 3. p. 2. burned it, King Edward the first for a time placed heere the staple, and King Edward the Third by exchange reunited it to the Crowne. A∣bout which time there flourished heere a familie surnamed De Sandwico, which had matched with one of the heires of Creve cur, and Dauranches, Lord of Folkesto, and deserved well of this place. In the time of King Henrie the Sixth it was burned by the French. In our daies Sir Roger Manwood chiefe Baron of the Ex∣chequer native of this place, built, and endowed heere a free-schoole, and the Netherlanders have bettered the towne by making, and trading of Baies, and other commodities. Cantium the Promontory. Beneath Rhutupiae, Ptolomee placeth the Promontorie CANTIVM as the utmost cape of this Angle, which in some copies is corruptly written NVCANTIVM and ACANTIVM: The Fore∣land. Diodorus as corruptly calleth it CARION, and we at this day the Foreland of Kent. Now all these shores on every side, are of this Rhutupiae by the Poets termed Rhutupina littora. Hence it is, that Iuvenall satyrically inveighing against Curtius Montanus a dainty and delicious glutton, speaking of oysters carried from this shore to Rome, hath these verses. —nulli major fuit usus edendi Tempestate meâ, Circaeis nata forent, an Lucrinum ad saxum, Rhutupinòve aedita fundo Ostrea, callebat primo deprendere morsu. None in my time had more use of his tooth, Whence oisters came, where they were bred, full well He knew: at Circeie cape, at Lucrine rock, forsooth, Or Rhutup British sea. coast, at first bit he could tell. And Lucan the Poet. Aut vaga cùm Thetis, Rhutupináque littora fervent. Or when unconstant waving sea, and British shores doe Or boyle. rage. From this fore-land aforesaid, the shore runneth on Southward for certaine miles together, indented with a continued raunge of many hilles mounting up. But when it is come as farre as Sandon (that is to say the Downe of Sand), and to Deale, and Walmer, Sandon, Deale. where Caesar arrived. three Neighbour Castles, which King Henrie the Eighth, within the re∣membrance of our Fathers built, it setleth low, and in a flat and open plaine lieth full against the sea. At this Deale, or Dole: as Ninnius calleth it (and that truely in mine opinion: For, our Britains at this day doe so terme a plaine lying low and open upon sea or river) the constant report goes that Iulius Caesar did arrive: and Nin∣nius avoucheth as much, who in barbarous Latine wrote thus, Caesar ad Dole bellum pugnavit, that is, At Dole Caesar fought a battaile. A Table likewise set up in Dover Castle confirmeth the same: yea and Caesar himselfe verifieth it: who reporteth that he landed upon an open and plaine shore, and that the Britaines welcommed and re∣ceived him with a hote and dangerous encounter. Whereupon, our Countrey man Leland in his Swans song Iactat Dela novas celebris arces, Notus Caesareis locus trophaeis. Deale famed much, vuants of new turrets hie, A place well knowne by Caesars victorie. For hee, Caesars entry into Britaine. (give mee leave I pray you to digresse awhile out of my course) ha∣ving, (as Pomponius Sabinus reporteth out of Seneca ) wonne all that was to bee gotten by sea and land, cast his eie to the Ocean, and as if the Romane world would not suffice him, bethought him selfe upon another world: and with a fleete of a thousand saile (for so writeth Athenaeus out of Cotas, either to bee revenged of the Britains who aided the Gaules (as Strabo saith; or in hope of British pearles, as Suctonius reporteth: or inflamed with an ambitious desire of glory, as others doe record, in the yeare before Christs nativitie fiftie foure, and once againe in the yeare ensuing, entred into Britaine: having before hand sounded the havens by his espialls, In his booke de Artees Na∣tu . as Su tonius, and himselfe doth testifie; and not, as Roger Bachon fableth, by setting certaine looking glasses upon the coast of Gaule, and by Art perspective, which by reflection multiplieth hidden formes. What hee exploited here, him∣selfe hath at large delivered in his Commentaries ; and I likewise before have summa∣rily abridged out of him, and the writings of Suetonius concerning Scaeva, whose va∣lourous service during the civill warre was notably seen above others at Dyrrachium, and whom our Poet Ioseph of Excester in his Antiocheis, and namely in these his verses touching Britaine, reported (I know not how truely) to have beene a Britaine borne. Hinc et Scaeva satus, pars non obscura tumulius Civilis, MAGNVM solus qui mole solutâ Obsedit, melior{que} stetit pro Caesare murus. Here borne also was Scaeva, he that bare no little sway In all these civill broiles; the Fort that stood full in his way Alone he brake, Pompey besieged, was Caesars strongest stay. But what were the exploits of Caesar in this our country, See page 34, 35, &c. learne you may of him∣selfe, and out of that which hath before beene written. For, neither as yet, have I met with that old father a Britaine, whom Marcus Aper, as we read in Quintilian, saw in this Island; who avowed that he was present at the battaile, in which they assaied to keepe Caesar from landing, when he came to warre upon them: neither is it any part of my meaning now to write an Historie, but a Topographie. Vpon this shore, lie out with a long traine certaine heapes in manner of bankes or rampiers, which some imagine that the winde swept up together. But I suppose them to have beene a fence and countermure, Castra nava∣lia. Caesars ship-campe. or rather the Ship-campe, which Caesar raised with ten daies and as many nights labour, to haile up thereto his sea-beaten and shaken Navie, and to defend it, both against tempests and also the Britaines, who in vaine did assaile it. For I understand by relation of the dwellers, thereby, that this rampier is cal∣led Romes-worke, as if it were A worke of the Romans. And so much the rather believe I, that Caesar arrived heere, because hee writeth, that seven miles from hence, (for, so wee reade in the ancient bookes, corrected by Flavius Constantinus a man of Consul degree ) the sea is kept in and compassed with such streight mountaines that for the higher places a dart may bee flung to the very shore: verily as soone as we are past Deale, a mightie ridge of steepe high Cliffs, Cice∣ro termeth them moles magnificas, that is, Stately cliffes bringing forth Samphyre in great plenty, runneth for seven miles or there about, as far as to Dover: where it ope∣neth it selfe: and of that nature is the place, that, right as Caesar writeth, betweene two hills it letteth in and encloseth the sea. Within this partition and separation of the Cliffes lieth DVBRIS, Dubris. Dover. Darell. which Antonine the Emperour mentioneth, the Saxons name it , and we Dover. This name was given unto it, as Darell out of Ead∣mer writeth, because the place was shut up and hard to come unto. For, when as, (saith he) in ancient times the sea there barbarous spreaded it selfe upon urgent ne∣cessitie to make it a more commodious haven, they kept it in with more streight bounds. Howbeit, William Lambard, with more probabilitie fetched the reason of this name from the word Dufyrrha, which in the British language betokeneth a place steepe and upright. The towne which is seated betweene high clyffes (whereas some-time the ha∣ven was, when the sea more insinuated it selfe, as wee collect by the anchors and ship planks that are digged there up; is more famous for the commodiousnesse of the haven, (such as it is) and for readie passage into France, than for any elegancie, or great trade. For it is a place of passage of all other most haunted, and it was pro∣vided in old time by a speciall Statute, that no man going forth of the realme in pilgrimage, should else where embarque and take sea: more-over it is reckoned one of the Cinque-ports, and in times past it was charged to furnish and set out one and twenty ships unto the warres, in the same manner and forme as Hastings did, whereof I have already spoken. In Sussex. Toward the sea (now somewhat excluded by Beach) it was fenced with a wall; whereof some part as yet standeth. It had a faire church conse∣crated unto Saint Martin, founded by Whitred King of Kent, an house also of the Knights-Templars, which now are quite gone, and nothing to bee seene of them: It yeildeth likewise a seat for the Archbishop of Canterburies Suffragans, who when the Archbishop is busied in weightier affaires, mannageth for him matters that per∣taine to Orders onely, Suffragan to the Archbi∣shop of Can∣terburie. and not to the Episcopall jurisdiction. From the top of a rough and crag i cliffe which mounteth up to a wonderfull height, where it looketh downe to the sea: a most statey Castle like unto a prettie Citie fortified right strongly with bul-warkes and many a Tower, overlooketh and threatneth after a sort the sea under it: Matthew of Paris calleth it the Key and Locke, The Barre and Sparre of England. The common sort of people dreameth, that it was built by Iulius Caesar, and verily I suppose by the British Bricks in the Chappell there, that it was built by the Ro∣mans, who used such in their great buildings. What time as the Roman Empire de∣clined, they placed here a band or companie of the Tungricanes, A band of the Tungricanes. who were accoun∣ted among the Aides-Palatine: out of whose armoury and munition happily were those big arrowes, which the Castellanes doe now shew for wonders, and were wont to bee discharged then, and many yeares after, before the invention of great Ordnance, out of engines called Balistae like huge crosse-bowes bent by force of two or foure men. From the entrance of the English Saxons into this land, unto the expiation of their Kingdome, no where could I as yet reade so much as one bare word of this Castle or the Towne; save onely in certaine by-notes out of a Table, that was heere hanged upon a wall; which reported that Caesar, having arrived at Deale, and discomfited the Britaines at Baramdowne (which is a plaine adjoyning, fit for horse fight, and meete to embattaile an armie in) began the Castle of Dover; and that Arviragus afterward fortified it against the Romans, and stopped up the haven. Also, that after him King Arthur and his knights vanquished I wot not what rebels heere. Howbeit a little before the Normans comming in, it was reputed the onely defence and strength of England: and for that cause William Duke of Normandie, bound Harold by on oath to deliver up into his hands this Castle to∣gether with the well, what time as he aspired to the Kingdome: and after hee had settled his estate and affaires at London, thought it good before all other things to fortifie this peece, and to assigne faire lands in Kent unto Gentlemen to bee held in Castle-guard, with this condition to be in readinesse with certaine numbers of men for defence of the same: which service notwithstanding at this day is redeemed with a yearely paiment of money. Castleguard changed. For, when Sir Hubert de Burgh was Constable of this Castle, (to use the words of an old writer) he weighed with himselfe that it was not safe for the Castle to have every moneth new warders for the Castle guard, procured by the assent of the King and all that held of that Castle, that every one should send for the ward of one moneth tenne shillings: and that therewith certaine men elected and sworne, as well horse as foote, should be waged, for to gard the Castle. It is written, that Phillip surnamed Au∣gustus King of France, when Lewis his sonne, went about to gaine the Crowne of England, had wonne certaine Cities and Forts, and could not get this, being man∣fully defended by the said Sir Hubert de Burgh: said thus. Verily my sonne hath not one foote of land in England, untill he be Master of Dover Castle: as beeing in very deed the strongest hold of all England and most commodious for the French. Vpon the other cliffe which standeth over against it, and beareth up his head, in manner, even with it, are extant the remaines of a very ancient building. One, I know not upon what rea∣son induced, said it was Caesars Altar. But Iohn Twin of Canterbury a learned old man, who in his youth saw a great part thereof standing whole and entire, assured me, that it had beene a Watch-towre to give night light and direction to ships. Like as there stood another opposite unto it at Bologne in France, erected thereby the Ro∣mans, and long after reedified by Charles the Great (as Regino witnesseth, in whom Phanum, for Pharum, is falsly read, which at this day the French terme Tour de Or∣der, and the English, The old man of Bullen. Vnder this cliffe, Henry the Eighth, in our fathers daies with exceeding labour, and 63000. pounds charges, by pitching huge posts fast within the very sea, and the same bound together with yron worke, and hea∣ping thereupon a deale of timber and stones, brought up a mightie Pile which we call, The Peere, wherein the ships might more safely ride. But the furious violence of the raging Ocean soone overcame the laudable endeavour of that puissant Prince, and so the frame of this worke beaten continually upon with the waves, became dis-joy∣ned. For the repaire whereof, Queene Elizabeth laid out a great summe of money, and the Authoritie of Parliament imposed upon every English ship that carry forth or bring in merchandise a certaine toll upon Tonneage for certaine yeares. This Sea coast of Britaine is seperated from the Continent of Europe by a frete or streight, where, as some suppose the Seas brake in and made way betweene the lands. Solinus calleth it Fretum Gallicum, Tacitus, and Ammianus Macellinus, Fretum Oceani, and Oceanum Fretalem, Gratius the Poet: Freta Morinum dubio refluentia ponto. The narrow Seas on Bollen-coast that keepe uncertaine tides. They of the Netherlands call it Dehofden, The streight of Calais or narrow seas. of the two heads or promontories; we the Narrow-sea, and The strait of Calais, as the Frenchmen, Pas de Callais. For, this is the place as saith a Poet of our time. —gemini quà janua ponti Faucibus angustis, latèque frementibus undis Gallorum Anglorumque vetat concurrere terras. Where current of two seas In gullet streight, wherein throughout, their billowes rage and fret Keepes France and England so a part, as though they never met. The narrow sea, as Marcellinus truly writeth, swelleth at every tide with terrible high flouds, and againe at the ebbe, becommeth as flat as a plaine field: if it be not raised with winds, and counter seas betweene two risings of the moone it floweth twice and ebbeth as oft. For, as the Moone ascendeth toward the Meridian, and is set againe under the Hori∣zon in the just opposite point, the Ocean heere swelleth mightily, and the huge bil∣lowes rush upon the shores with so great a noise that the Poet might well say, Rhutu∣piná{que} littora fervent. And Rhutup shore doth boile and billow, and D. Paulinus, where he speaketh of the County of Bulloigne, which he termeth the utmost skirt of the world, not without cause used these words, Oceanum barbaris fluctibus frementem, that is, The Ocean raging and roaring with barbarous billowes. Heere might arise a question beseeming a learned man that hath wit and time at will, Whether Britanie was in time past joyned unto France. whether, where this narrow sea runneth between France and Britaine now, there was a narrow banke or necke of land that in times past conjoyned these regions, and afterwards being broken either by the generall deluge, or by rushing in of the waves, or else by occasion of some earth-quake, did let in the waters to make a through pas∣sage. Verily, as no man makes doubt that the face of the whole earth hath beene alte∣red, partly by the said deluge, and partly by long continuance of time and other causes: as also that Ilands by earthquakes, or the shrinking back of waters were laid and joy∣ned unto firme lands: so, most certainly it appeareth by authors of best credite, that Ilands by reason of earthquakes and the breaking in of waters were severed, disjoy∣ned, and rent from the Continent. Whereupon Pythagoras in Ovid saith thus: Vidi ego quod quondam fuerat solidissima tellus Esse fretum; vidi factas ex aequore terras. My selfe have seene maine ground sometime turned into sea and sand, And seene I have againe the Sea, became maine setled land. Strabo gathering of things to come by those that are past, concluded that such Isthmi, neckes, or narrow bankes of land, both have beene, and shall bee wrought and pierced through. You see, saith Seneca, whole regions violently removed from their places, and now to lie beyond the Sea, which lay before bounding upon it and hard by. You see, there is separation made both of Countries and nations, when as some part of nature is provoked of it selfe: or when the mighty wind beateth strongly upon some sea: the force whereof, as in generall, is wonderfull. For, although it rage but in part, yet it is of the uni∣versall power that so it rageth. Thus hath the sea rent Spaine from the Continent of Africke: Thus by Deucalions floud so much spoken of by the greatest Poets, was Sicilie out from Italy. And hereupon Virgil wrote thus, Haec loca vi quondam, & vasta convulsa ruinâ (Tantum aevi longinqua valet mutare vetustas) Dissiluisse ferunt, cùm protinùs utraque tellus Vna foret, venit medio vi pontus & undis, Hesperium Siculo latus abscidit, arva{que} & urbes Littore diductas angusto interluit aestu. These lands whilom by violence of breach and ruines great, (Such change makes time, and what is it that long time doth not eate?) A sunder fell (men say) where as they both in one did grow, The Seas brake in by force, and through the mids did overthrow Both townes and grounds. And Italy forthwith from Sicily side, Did cut, and them with in-let streight doth still part and divide. Plinie sheweth likewise of Isles, that Cyprus was rent from Syria, Eubaea, from Baeo∣tia, Besbicus, from Bythinia, being parts before of the maine land: But none of the old writers was ever able to avouch, that Britaine was so severed from the Maine: onely those verses of Virgil and Claudian before cited by me in the very first entrance into this worke, together with the conjecture of Servius Honoratus doe insinuate so much. And yet, Dominicus Marius Niger, and Master Iohn Twin a right learned man, and whosoever he was that wrested these verses made of Scicilia, unto Britaine, are of this opinion: —Britannia quondam Gallorum pars una fuit, sed pontus & aestus Mutavere situm, rupit confinia Nereus Victor: & abscissos interluit aequore montes. —Some time was Britannie A part of France. But swelling tides on hie Have changed the site; and Nereus he, as Conquerour hath torne The confines quite, and runnes betweene the cliffs a sounder worne. Considering therefore, that in this matter there is no assured ground upon certaine authoritie; the learned, by laying and comparing the like examples in such narrow Seas as this, for searching out of the truth; propose these and such like points duly to be weighed and considered. First, whether the nature of the soyle in both shores be the same; which verily is found here to be even so: For the shore of either side, where the distance betweene is narrowest, riseth up with loftie cliffes, of the same matter, as it were, and colour, so as they may seeme to have beene riven asunder. Secondly, How great the breadth is of the sea or streight. Certes, the streight heere is not much broader, than either the streight of Gibraltar, or of Scicily: to wit, twenty foure miles over: so as at the first sight, one would imagine that these lands were severed by the billowes of the raging counter-seas. For that the land sunke downeward by earth-quakes, I hardly dare thinke, seeing that this our Northen cli∣mate of the world is seldome shaken with earth-quakes, and those when they happen, be never great. Thirdly, How deepe the streight is. As the Streight of Sicilie is sounded in depth 80. paces, so this of ours exceedeth not 25. fathom, whereas the sea on both sides of it is much deeper. Fourthly, Of what nature the ground is in the bothoms, stony, sandy, beachy, or else oasy, and muddy. And whether there be beds or shelves of sand lying scattered in the said narrow sea? I have learned of Sailers that there lieth but Frowen shoale. one banke, and the same in the very mid-channell, which at a low water is scarce 3. fathom deepe, But within halfe a league to the South-ward it is 27. fathom deepe, and to the North-ward 25. Lastly, Whether any place in either of the two shores taketh name in the ancient language, of a breach, a plucking away, division, separation or such like? as Rhegium which standeth upon the Sicilian Streight, is named of the Greeke word that is, to breake, because in that place, by the violent force of waves Sicilie was broken off from Italie. But thinking, as I doe heereof, I can meet with none, unlesse one would suppose that Vitsan upon the French shore, had the name from Gwith, which in the Welch. British tongue betokeneth a division or separation. They that would have Britaine to have been the very continent of Gaule after that universall deluge, argue from the wolves, whereof there were many among us in old time, like as at this day in Scotland and Ireland. How, say they, could there be any of them in Ilands considering that all beasts and living creatures perished which were not in the Arke? unlesse a long time after, the earth had beene passable throughout, and no Isles at all. This question busied Saint Augustine, De Civitate Dei lib. 16. c. 7. but unto it he answereth thus, Wolves and other beasts may bee thought to have swome over the sea unto Ilands, yet onely to neere adjoyning Ilands ( as stags yearely for their reliefe and food swim out of Italy into Cicily). But some Isles there be so far remote from maine lands, that it is to be thought no beast could swim over. If it should bee said, men caught them and so brought them over with them, it carrieth some credit, that this might well have beene for the delight they had in hunting. Although it cannot bee de∣nied but by the commandement or permission of God even by the worke of Angels they might have beene transported. But if so be they sprung out of the earth according to their first originall, when as God said, Let the earth bring forth a living soule, then it appeareth much more evidently, that all kind of living creatures were in the Arke, not so much for the encrease and reparation of them, as to As a type of the Gentiles calling. figure out sundry Nations for the sacrament of the church, in case the earth, brought forth many creatures in those Ilands, whereto they can not passe. Thus Philosophizeth he. Neither is any man able upon this argument to pro∣nounce any thing more sufficiently and exquisitely. For me, it may suffice, that I have propounded thereof, let the Reader throughly waigh and examine it. And hee that is able in this point to see deepest what is most true, verily I will report him a man right skilfull and deepely quick-sighted. Morini. On the other side in the Firme-land, inhabited the MORINI, so called in the an∣cient Gaules tongue, as it were Maritimi, sive Maris accolae, men dwelling upon the Sea∣coast, or hard by the sea. Their countrey is now termed Conto de Guines, and Conte de Bolonois, and had in old time two places of very great name, to wit GESSORIACVM, and ITIVM, That is from Itius Portus. whence, as Caesar hath recorded, there was the best and most com∣modious passing out of Gaule or France into Britain, and most Authors thinke it was that towne which now they call Callais. But that famous and learned man Hospitalius, Chancellour of France, a very skilfull Antiquary, avoucheth, that Callais is no anci∣ent towne, but was only a small village, such as the French-men terme Burgados, un∣till that Philip Earle of Bolen, walled it about, not very many yeares before the English won it. Neither is it red in any place, that men tooke shipping there for Bri∣taine, before those times. I thinke therefore that Itium is to bee sought some where else: that is to say, below, at Vitsan, neere unto Blacknesse, which we call Whitsan, the word sounding not much unlike to Itium. For, that all men crossed over out of this Iland thither, and embarqued there to saile hither, wee observed out of our owne hi∣stories: in so much as certaine lands were held in Coperland neere Dover by service to hold the Kings head betweene Dover and Whit-sand when soever hee crossed the Sea there. And Lewis the younger French King when he came in devout pilgrimage to visit Thomas of Canterbury, The shortest passage be∣tweene France and Britaine. besought that saint by way of most humble intercession, that no passenger might miscarry by shipwracke betweene Vitsan and Dover ; as who would say, that at the same time, that was the usual passage to and fro: neither in truth, is this narrow sea else where more streightned: although it is to bee supposed, that they who faile betweene, in passing over did not respect the neerer way and shorter cut in sailing, but the commodiousnesse of the havens in the one shoare, and the o∣ther. For even so, albeit the sea be narrowest, betweene Blacknesse in France, and the Nesse in England, yet now the ordinary passing is betweene Dover and Callais: as in former ages, before that Vitsan haven was dammed up, the passage was betweene it and Dover: and before that time, betweene Rhutupiae and Gessoriacum: From whence Claudius the Emperour and the other captaines, whom I have spoken of, sai∣led over into Britaine. Gessoriacum. This GESSORIACVM, Pliny seemeth to call. Portum Mori∣norum Britannicum, peradventure for the passage from thence into Britaine Ptolomee, in whom it hath crept into the place of Itium, nameth it Gessoriacum Navale, in which signification also our Welsh Britans commonly terme it Bowling-long, that is, Boloine the ship-road. For that Gessoriacum was the very same Sea-coast towne, which Ammianus cal∣leth BONONIA, Tabula Pente∣geriana, now set forth by M. Welser. Bonania Gal∣liae. the Frenchmen Bologne, the Low-country men Beunen, and wee Bolen, I dare bee bold to aver and maintaine against Hector Boethius, and Turnebus: grounding my assertion both upon the authoritie of Beatus Rhenanus, who saw an an∣cient military Map, wherein was written Gessoriacum quod nunc Bononia, that is, Ges∣soriacum, now called Bolen: and also upon Itinerarie computation, or account of the miles, which answereth just to the distance that Antonine the Emperour hath put downe betvveene Ambiani and Gessoriacum. But, that which may serve in steed of all proofes. The rablement of Pyrates serving under Carausius, which the Panegirick Oration, pronounced unto Constantius the Emperour, Pag. 272. in Basil edition and pag. 251. reported to have beene inclosed and shut up within the walles of Gessoriacum and there surprised: an other Oration unto Constantius Maximus his sonne, relateth to have beene vanquished at Bononia: so that Bononia, that is, Bolen, and Gessoriacum must needs be one and the selfe same place: and it may seeme, that the more ancient name was vvorne out much about that time. For it is not to be surmised, that so grave authors unto the great Princes erred in the setting downe and naming of this place, the memory thereof being then so fresh, and that victory so glorious. But, what have I to doe with France? Verily, I have the more willingly ripped up the memorie of these matters, for that the prowesse and valour of our Ancestours shewed it selfe often in this coast; as who wonne and wrested both Calais and Bolen from the French. And as for Bolen, they rendred it backe againe at the humble request of the French King after eight yeares, for a summe of money agreed upon. But Callais they held 212. yeare in despight and maugre of the French. Now returne wee to Britaine with full sailes and a favou∣rable tide. From ( Dover, leaving the little Abbey of Bradsole dedicated to S. Radegund, wher∣of Hugh the first Abbat was founder) there runneth for five miles in length a con∣tinued cheine of chalky cliffes standing on a row, hanging joyntly one to another, as far as to Folkstone: which was a flourishing place in times past, as may appeare by the pieces of Roman coine and Britaine brickes daily there found: but under what name, it is uncertaine. Probable it is, that it was one of those towres or holds which in the reigne of Theodosius the younger, the Romans placed for to keep off the Saxons, as Gildas saith, At certaine distances along the shore, in the South part of Britaine. Famous it was and much frequented by the English Saxons, for religions sake, by reason of a Monasterie that Eanswide daughter to Eadbald King of Kent consecrated there unto Nunnes: But now it is a small towne, and the greatest part thereof the Sea hath, as it were, parted away. Howbeit, it was the Baronie of the Family de Abrincis, or Aurenches: From whom it came to Sir Hamon Crevequer, and by his daughter to Sir Iohn of Sandwich, whose grand child Iulian by his sonne Iohn, brought the same as her dowry to Iohn Segrave. From thence, as the shore turneth a front South West-ward Sandgate Castle, built by King Henry the Eighth defendeth the coast, and upon a Castle hill there∣by are seene reliques of an ancient Castle. More inward is Saltwood a Castle of the Bishops of Canterbury which William Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury enlarged. And neere unto it is Often-hanger, where Sir Edward Poinings Baneret a father of many faire bastards, L. Poinings by King Henric the Eighth. and amongst them of Thomas Lord Poining Lieuftenant of Bollen, began to build a stately house but left it unperfect when death had bereft him of his onely lawfull child which he had by his lawfull wife the daughter of Sir I. Scot his neigh∣bour at Scots-Hall : where the family of Scots hath lived in worshipfull estimation a long time, as descended from Pashely, and Serteaux by Pimpe. But to returne to the sea∣coast: Hith. neere to Sandgate, Hith is situated, one of the Cinque ports, whereof it assumed that name, which in the English Saxons tongue signifieth an haven or harbour: al∣though hardly it maintaineth that name now, by reason of sands, and the Sea with∣drawing it selfe from it. And yet it is not long since it first made any shew, and that by the decay and fall of Westhyth, a neighbour-towne Westward, and which was some∣time a Port, untill the Sea in our great grandfathers daies retired from it. So are Sea∣townes subject to the uncertaine vicissitude of the Sea. This Hith, like as West-Hith also, had their beginning from the ruine of Lime stan∣ding hard by, which in times past was a most famous Port towne, untill the sands that the Sea casteth up, had choked and stopped the haven. Both, Antonine and the booke of Norrices called it PORTVS LEMANIS, Ptolomee which being in Greeke a significative word, the Copiantes, or Copiers out of old bookes, because they would seeme to supply the defect, wrot it and the Latin Interpreters following them translated it Novus portus, that is, New port, or New haven: whereas, the pro∣per name of the place was Limen or Leman, like as at this time Lime. Heere the Cap∣taine over a company or band of Turnacenses, kept his station under the Count or Lieuftenant of the Saxon shore. And a Port way paved with stone, called Stonystreet, reacheth from hence toward Canterbury, which one would easily judge to have beene a worke of the Romans, like as the Castle adjoyning hard unto it, now named Stutfall, which in the side and descent of a pretty hill, tooke up about tenne acres of ground in compasse: and the reliques of the wall remaine still of British bricke and flint so close laid and couched together with a kind of strong mortar made of lime, sand and pibles, that as yet time hath not given it the check: and now, although it be not an haven towne, yet it retaineth still no small shew of the ancient dignitie it had: For heere the Warden of the Cinque Ports at a place called Shipway useth to take his solemne oath, when hee first entreth into his office, and heere, upon certaine set daies, the custome was to decide causes betweene the inhabitants of the said Ports. Some have thought, that in this place a great river discharged it selfe into the sea, for that one or two writers have made mention of the river Leman, and the mouth of Leman, at which the Danes Fleet in the yeare of our salvation 892. arrived. But I suppose they are deceived in the description of the place, both because there is no river heere, but a very small one, which streight waies being of no reckoning at all vanisheth: as also, for that the Archdeacon of Huntingdon, a compendious authour, and of good approved credit writeth, that the said fleet arrived at the Haven Leman, and saith not a word of the river. Vnlesse a man would thinke, (with whom I dare not accord) that the river Rother, which intermingleth it selfe with the Ocean under Rhieine, ran downe this way, and changed his course by little and little, when that champian plaine called Rumney Marsh, grew unto the firme land. For,Rumney Marsh. this Marsh-country, (which from Lime containeth 14. miles in length, and 8. in bredth, and reckoneth two townes, nineteene parishes, and 44200. acres or there a∣bout, by reason of ranke greene grasse most convenient for the grasing and feeding of beasts), hath beene by little and little laied unto the land by the benefit of the sea. Whereupon I may well and truely terme it the Seas-gift, like as Herodotus called Ae∣gypt, the gift of the river Nilus, and a very Petrus Nan∣nius. learned man termed the pastures of Holland, the gifts of the North-wind and the river Rhene. For, the sea to make a∣mends yeilded that againe in this place (which it swallowed up else where in this coast) either by retyring backe, or by laying oze thereto from time to time: as some places which in the remembrance of our grandfathers, lay close unto the sea shore, are now dis-joyned a mile or two from the sea. How fruitful the soile is, what a num∣ber of heards of cattel it feedeth, that are sent thither from the furthest parts of Wale, and England to be fatted; what art and cunning is used in making of bankes to fence it, against the violent risings of the sea, one would hardly believe, that hath not seene it. And that it might be the better ordered, certaine lawes of Sewers were made in the time of King Henry the third. And King Edward the fourth ordained, that it should be a Corporation, consisting of a Bailive, Iurates, and the Communalty. In the Saxons time the inhabitants thereof were called , that is, Viri paln∣stres. Marshmen: and verily the signification of that name accordeth passing well with the nature of the place. Neither can I understand and conceive that ancient writer Aethelward, when he reporteth, 795. That Cinulph King of the Mercians wasted Kent, and the country which is called Mersc-warum. And in another place, That Herbyth a Captaine was by the Danes beheaded in a place named Mersc-warum, if he meant not this very Marsh-country, Rum∣ney, Rumney. or Romeney, and in former time Romenal, which some conjecture by the name to have beene the Romans worke, is the principall towne of this Marsh, and one of the Cinque-ports, whereof Old Romeney and Lid are accounted members, which joyntly were charged with the setting forth of five ships of warre, in that manner and forme, as I have before said. It is seated upon an hill of gravell and sand, and had on the West side an haven of good receit and commodious withall, for most of the winds; be∣fore the sea with-drew it selfe from it. Domes-day Booke. The inhabitants, as we read in King William the Conquerours booke, were in regard of their sea service, quitte and quiet from all custome, beside for The penal∣ties for these offences. robbery, peace-breach and Foristell. And in those daies it flourished with the best; For it was divided into twelue wards, it had also five Parish-churches, it had a Priorie, and an Hospitall for sicke persons: But in the reigne of Edward the first, when the sea raging with violence of windes overflowed this tract, and made pit∣tifull waste of people, of cattell and of houses in every place, as having quite drowned Promhil a prety town well frequented: 1287. it made the Rother also forsake his old channel, which heere before time emptied himselfe into the sea, and stopped his mouth, ope∣ning a new and neerer way for him to passe into the sea by Rhie: So as by little and little hee forsoke this towne. Which ever since hath decreased, and lost much of the forme, frequency, and ancient dignity. Beneath this, the land tending more East-ward maketh a Promontory, (we call it the Nesse, as it were a nose) before which lieth a dangerous flat in the sea, and upon which standeth Lid a towne well inhabited: whereunto the inhabitants of Promhill after that inundation aforesaid betooke themselves. Lid. And in the very utmost point of this Promontory which the people call Denge-nesse, Dnagenesse. where there is nothing but beach and pible stones, Hulver or Holy-trees Ilices. Holme-trees grow plentifully with their sharp prickey leaves al∣waies greene, in manner of underwood, for a mile and more. Among the said beach neere unto Ston end is to be seene an heape of greater stones, which the neighbour Inhabitants call Saint Cryspins, and Crispinians tombe, whom they report to have beene cast upon this shore by ship-wracke and from hence called into the glorious compa∣nie of Saints. From thence the shore retyring it selfe is directly carried into the West, bringing foorth peason among the beach, which grow up naturally like clusters of grapes a number together, and in tast little differ from our field peason, and so runneth on as farre as to the Rother-Mouth, by which for some space Kent is divided from Sussex. The course of this river on Sussex side wee have in part briefely spoken of before. On Kent side it hath Newenden, which I almost parswade my selfe was that haven so long sought for, and which the booke Notitia Provinciarū called ANDERIDA, the old Britains Caer Andred, Anderida. Andredceaster. and the Saxons : first, because the Inha∣bitants by a continued tradition constantly affirme it was a most ancient towne and Haven whereof they shew the plot; then, for that it is situate by the wood Andreds∣wald, that tooke the name of it; lastly, because the English-Saxons seeme to have termed it Brittenden, that is, The Britans Vale, (as they called also Segontium an an∣cient towne of the Britans of which we spake before): whence the whole Hundred adjoyning is named Selbrittenden. The Romans for to defend this coast against the Saxon rovers, placed heere the band of the Abulci with their Captaine: Afterward being taken by the English Saxons it decaied quite. For, Hengist being fully deter∣mined to rid all the Britans out of Kent, and thinking it would much availe him to encrease his troupes and bands with greater forces of his owne nation, called foorth Aella out of Germany with a strong power of English Saxons, and while he gave the assault unto this Anderida by violence, the Britans out of the wood hard by, where they laie in ambushments, chased him so, that at length after many losses on both sides given and taken, when he had parted his army and both discomfited and put to flight the Britans in the wood, and also at the same time forced the towne, by as∣saults; his barbarous heart was so enflamed with desire of revenge, that he put the In∣habitants to the sword and razed the towne even to the ground. The place lying thus desolate, was shewed, (as Henry of Huntingdon saith,) to those that passed by many ages af∣ter. Vntill the Friers Carmelites newly come out from Mount Carmell in the Holi∣land, who sought for such solitary places, built them heere a little Priory in the time of King Edward the first, at the charges of Sir Thomas Albuger Knight: and so streight waies there rose up a village, which in regard of the old towne overthrowen, began to be called Newenden, that is, The New towne in the vale. I saw nothing there now, but a mean village with a poore Church, & a wodden bridge to no great purpose for a ferry is in most use, since that the river Rother, not containing himselfe in his cha∣nell hath overlaied, & is like to endanger & surround the levell of rich lands thereby. Whereupon the inhabitants of Rhie complaine, that their haven is not scoured by the streame of Rother as heeretofore, and the owners heere suffer great losse: which their neighbours in Oxeney doe feare, if it were remedied, would fall upon them. This is a river-isle ten miles about, Oxeney. encompassed with the river Rother dividing his streames, and now brackish; having his name either of mire, which our ancestours called Hox, or of Oxen, which it feedeth plentifully with ranke grasse. Opposite to this is Appledore, Appledore. where a confused rabble of Danish and Norman Pirates, which under the conduct of one Hasting had sore annoied the French coasts, loden with booties landed, and built a Castle: whom notwithstanding King Aelfred by his valour enfor∣ced to accept conditions of peace. Vp-land hence, and from Nawenden I saw (which I should have before remem∣bred) Cranbroke and Tenterden good clothing towns, Sisingherst. Sisingherst a faire house of the familie of Bakers advanced by Sir Iohn Baker not long since Chauncellour of the Ex∣chequer, and his marriage with a daughter and heire of Dingley, Bengebury. Bengebury an habi∣tation of the ancient familie of Colpepper, Homsteed. and neere adjoining Hemsted a mansion of the Guildfords, an old familie, but most eminent since S. Iohn Guilford was Controu∣ler of the house to king Edward the Fourth. Guildford. For his sonne and heire S. Richard Guild∣ford was by king Henry the seventh made knight of the Garter. Of his sonnes againe Sir Edward Guildford was Marshall of Callais, Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports, and Master of the Ordnance, father to Iane Dutches of Northumberland, wife to Sir I. Dudley Duke of Northumberland, mother to the late Earles of Warwick, and Leicester, and Sir Henrie was chosen Knight of the Garter by King Henrie the Eight, and had his Armes enobled with a Canton of Granado by Ferdinand king of Spaine for his wor∣thy service in that Kingdome when it was recovered from the Moores, and Edward, lived in great esteeme at home. To be briefe from the said Sir Iohn are issued by fe∣males immediatly the Darells of Cale-hill, Gages, Brownes of Beechworth, Walsinghams, Cromers, Isaacs, and Iseleies, families of prime and principall note in these parts. But now I digresse and therefore crave pardon. In the parishes heere-about the commendable trade of cloathing was first set up and freshly practised, ever since King Edward the Third his daies, who by proposing rewards, and granting many immunities, trained Flemings into England in the tenth yeere of his reigne to teach our men that skill of Draperie, or weaving and making wollen cloth, which is justly counted at this day one of the Staies that sup∣port our common Weale. Thus much of Kent, which (to conclude summarily) hath this part last spoken of for Draperie, the Isle of Tenet and the East parts for the Grana∣rie, the Weald for the wood, Rumney Marsh for the meddow-plot, the North downs to∣ward the Thames for the Conny-garthe, Kentish capons. Tenham and thereabout for an Orchard, and Head-Corne for the brood and poultrey of fat, big, and commended capons. Earles of Kent. As for the Earles, omitting the English Saxons Godwin, and Leofwin his brother, and others, who were Earles not by descent and inheritance, but by office. Odo halfe brother by the mothers side to King William the Conquerour, and Bishop of Baieux, was the first Earle of Kent, of the Norman bloud: a man, by nature of a bad disposition and busie head, bent alwaies to sow sedition and to trouble the State. Whereupon he was committed to prison by a subtile distinction, as Earle of Kent, and not Bishop of Baieux in regard of his holie orders; and afterward for a most dan∣gerous rebellion which he had raised, he was by his nephew King William Rufus de∣prived of his places of dignity, lost all his goods in England and abjured the Realme. Afterwards, King Stephen who as an Intruder reaped the revenewes and Commo∣dities of the Crowne of England, that hee might bind by benefits martiall men to him, hee advanced William of Ipres a Fleming to that honor: who being, as Fitz-Stephen calleth him; Violentus Cantij incubator, that is, the violent over-pressor of Kent, was forced by King Henrie the second to depart, sheading many teares and so be∣came a monke, Henrie likewise the sonne of King Henrie the second, whom his fa∣ther had crowned King, rebelling against his father, gave in like respect the title of Kent unto Philip Earle of Flanders. But this Philip was Earle of Kent in title only and by promise. For, as Gervase of Canterburie writeth, Philip Earle of Flanders under∣tooke to the uttermost of his power for to aide the young King, doing him homage and bin∣ding himselfe with an oath; unto whom the said King promised in reward of his service the revenewes of a thousand pounds, together with all Kent: also the Castle of Rochester and the Castle of Dover. Not many yeeres after, Hubert de Burgh, having done notable good service unto the State, received as it were, by due desert the same honor at the hands of King Henrie the Third: who also made him chiefe Iustice of England. This Hubert was a man who unfainedly loved his Countrie, & amidst the stormes of frow∣ning Fortune performed all duties to the utmost that his Countrey could require of a right good patriot. Yet at length he fell in disgrace, and was dispoyled of his digni∣ties: whereby this title slept and lay as dead untill the time of King Edward the Se∣cond. Who bestowed it upon his younger brother Edmund of Woodstocke, An. 15. E. 2. who be∣ing Tutor of his nephew Edward the Third, falling into the tempest of false, injuri∣ous, and malignant envie was beheaded, for that he never dissembled his naturall brotherly affection toward his brother deposed, and went about when hee was (God wot) murthered before (not knowing so much) to enlarge him out of prison; perswa∣ded thereunto by such as covertly practised his destruction. Hee had two sonnes Edmund, and Iohn, who were restored by Parliament to bloud and land shortly after. And with all, it was inacted that no Peere of the land, or other that procured the death of the said Earle should bee empeached therefore, than Mortimer Earle of March, Sir Simon Beresford, Iohn Matravers, Baious, and Iohn Devoroil. So these his two sonnes succeeded in order, and when they were both dead without issue, their sister Ioane, who survived them, (for her lovely beautie called The Faire maid of Kent ) brought this honour unto the house of the Hollands. For Sir Thomas Holland her husband was stiled Earle of Kent, and shee after married by dispensation to the Black Prince heire to him King Richard the Second. Her sonne Sir Thomas Holland succee∣ded in that honourable title, who died in the twentieth yeare of King Richard the Se∣cond. Him againe there succeeded his two sonnes Thomas and Edmund. Thomas who also was created Duke of Surry, and forthwith for complotting a conspiracie a∣gainst King Henry the Fourth lost his head, leaving no child: Edmunds his brother being Lord High Admirall of England, Saint Brieu. was wounded at the assault of Saint Brieu in little Britan, and died thereof in the yeare of Salvation 1408. leaving likewise no is∣sue. Now when this dignitie was expired, in this family of the Hollands, their glasse being runne out, and the Patrimony parted among Edmund sisters; King Edward the Fourth honoured with the title of the Earldome of Kent, The Wal∣singham. First Sir William Nevill Lord Fauconberg: and after his death, Edmund Lord Grey of Ruthin, Hastings and Weisford, and who had to succeed him George his sonne. Hee of Anne Widevile his first wife begat Richard Earle of Kent, who having wasted his inheritance ended therewith his daies issuelesse, 1523. But the said George by his second wife Katherine, daughter to William Herbert Earle of Pembrooke, was father of Sir Henry Grey of Wrest knight, whose grand-sonne Reginald, by his sonne Henrie, Queene Elizabeth in the yeare 1571. advanced to the Earledom of Kent. And after his decease without issue, his brother Henrie succeeded, a right honourable personage and endued with the ornaments of true nobility. This province hath parishes. 398. DOBVNI. H Itherto we have walked over all those Countries that lie betweene the British Ocean of the one side, and the Severne sea and river Thames on the other. Now according to the order which wee have begun, let us survey the rest throughout: and passing o∣ver the said river returne to the head of Thames and the salt water of Severne ; and there view the DOBVNI, who in an∣cient times inhabited those parts which now are termed Oxford-shire and Glocester-shire. Duffin in the British tongue signifieth low, deepe, or flat. This their name, I verily suppose came of Duffen a British word, because the places where they planted themselves, were for the most part low and lying under the hils, whereupon the name became common to them all: and verily from such a kind of site, Bathieia in Troas, Catabathmos in Africk, and Deep-Dale in Britan tooke their names. I am the more easily induced to believe this because I see, that Dio in the very same signification hath named certaine people, Bodo what it signifieth in British and French. BODVNNI if the letters be not misplaced. For, Bodo or BODVN, (as Plinie saith) in the ancient French tongue, (which I have proved before was the same that in the British language,) betokeneth Deepe. Hence was it, that the City Bo∣dincomagus, as he writeth, became so called, for that it stood where the river Padus. Po was deepest hence had the people Bodiontij that name, who in∣habited a deepe vale by the Lake of Lozanne, and Geneva, now called Val de Fontenay, to say nothing of Bodotria the deepest Frith in all Britan. Concerning these Bodunj, I have found in all my reading no matter of great antiquity, save only that A. Plautius sent as Propraetor by Claudius into Britan, received part of them upon their submission in∣to his protection, to wit, those that were under Cattuellani, (for they held the region bordering upon them) and as Dio hath recorded, about the forty and foure yeare after Christ was borne, placed a garrison over them. But when the English Saxons reigned in Britan, and the name of Do∣buni was worne out, some of these, as also the people dwelling round about them, were by a new English Saxons name called Wiccij : but whereupon, I dare scarce venture to guesse, without craving leave of the Reader. Yet, if Wic in the Saxons tongue soundeth as much as the Or Cove. creeke, or reach of a river, and the Viguones, a nation in Germanie are so called, be∣cause they dwell neere unto the creekes or baies of the Sea, and of rivers, (for so doth Beatus Rhenanus constantly affirme) It will bee no absurditie, Wiccii. if I derive our Wiccii from thence, who inhabited round about the mouth of Severne, which is very full of such Coves and small creekes and reaches. GLOCESTRLAE Comitatus olim sedes DOBVNORUM GLOCESTER-SHIRE. G Locester-shire, in the Saxon tongue , which was the chiefe seat of the Dobuni, on the West-side butteth up∣on on Monmouth-shire and Hereford-shire, on the North upon Worcester-shire, on the East upon Warwick-shire, Oxford-shire and Barck-shire, on the South upon Wilt-shire and So∣merset-shire both. A pleasant countrey and a fruitfull, stretching out in length, from North-east unto South-west. The part that lyeth more East-ward, rising up in height with hils and wolds is called Cotteswold: the middle part settleth downe low to a most fertile plaine, and is watered with Severne that noble river, which doth infuse life, as it were, into the soile. That part which bendeth more Westward on the further side of Severne, is all over be spread with woods. But what meane I to busie my selfe herein? William of Malmesbury will ease mee of this labour, who fully gives high commendations to this countrey. Have therefore what he writeth in his booke of Bishop; The coun∣trey (saith he) is called of the principall Citie: The vale of Glocester. the ground through∣out yieldeth plentie of corne, and bringeth forth abundance of fruits: the one through the naturall goodnesse onely of the ground, the other through diligent manuring and tillage; in so much, as it would provoke the laziest body that is, to take paines, seeing that it answereth backe againe with the encrease of an hundred fold, that which is sowne. Here may you see the high wayes and common lanes clad with apple-trees and peare-trees, not set nor graffed by the industry of mans hand, but growing naturally of their owne accord. The ground of it selfe is enclined to beare fruits, and those both in taste and beautie farre exceeding others: whereof some will last a whole yeare and not wither and rivell: so that they are ser∣viceable untill new come againe for supply. There is no countrey in all England so thicke set as this Province with Vine-yards, Vines and wine. so plentifull in encrease, and so pleasant in taste. The very wines thereof made, affect not their mouthes that drinke of them with any un∣pleasing tartnesse, as being little inferiour in sweetnesse and odour to the French wines. The houses in it are almost innumerable, the Churches passing faire, and the townes standing very thicke. But that which addeth unto all these good gifts a speciall glory is the river Severne, Severn. than which there is not any one in this land, for channell broader, for streame swifter, for fish better stored. There is in it a daily rage and fury of the waters, which I know not whether I may call a gulfe or whirle poole of waves, and the same raising up the sands from the bothome winding and driving the same upon heapes, commeth with a forcible violence, and reacheth no further then to the bridge. Sometimes also it overfloweth the bankes, and when it hath roved about a great way, it retireth backe as a conquerour of the land. Vnhappy is that vessell which it taketh full upon the side. The Water-men well ware hereof when they see that Higra comming, (for so they call it in English), turne the vessell affront upon it, Higra. and so cutting through the middest of it, checke and avoide the violence thereof. But that which hee saith of the hundred fold increase and yeeld of the ground, doth not hold true. Neither for all that, would I thinke with these whining and sloathfull husbandmen, whom Columella taketh up for it, that the soile is now wearied and become barren with too much fruitfulnesse and over-free bearing in former ages. Howbeit hereby, if I should say nothing of other things, it is to bee seene, that wee have no cause to wonder, why many places in this coun∣trey and else-where in England are called Vine-yards, seeing it hath affoorded wine; and surely it may seeme to proceed rather of the Inhabitants idlenesse than any distemperature and indisposition of the ayre; that it yeeldeth none at this day. But why in some places within this Countrey, as wee reade in our Statutes, by a private custome which now is become of strong validitie as a law, the goods and lands of condemned persons fall into the Kings hands for a yeare onely and a day, and after that terme expired (contrary to the custome of all England beside) returne to the next heires, let law-students and Statesmen looke to that: for no part it is of my purpose to search thereinto. Now I will take a superfi∣all survey (such as I can) of those three parts whereof I spake orderly one after another. Forrest of Deane. The part, that lyeth more West beyond Severne, (which the Silures in old time possessed) along the river Vaga or Wye, that parteth England and Wales, was wholy bespred with thicke tall woods: we call it at this day, Deane-forrest: The Latine writers some name it of the Danes Danica Sylva the Danes wood others with Girald, the Wood of Danubia. But I would thinke, if it had not this name of Dean a little towne adjoy∣ning, that by short cutting the word, Arden. it was called Deane, for Arden. Which terme both Gauls and Britans in ancient times may seeme to have used for a wood, consi∣dering that two mighty great woods, the one in that part of Gaule called Gallia Belgi∣ca, and the other among us in Warwick-shire, are by one and the selfe same name termed Arden. For, this was a wonderfull thicke Forrest, and in former ages so darke and terrible, by reason of crooked and winding wayes, as also the grisly shade therein, that it made the inhabitants more fierce, and bolder to commit robberies. For in the reigne of Henry the sixt they so infested all Severne side with robbing and spoiling, that there were lawes made by authority of the Parliament, for to restraine them. Iron. But since that rich Mines of Iron were heere found out, those thicke woods began to wax thin by little and little. In this Forrest, upon the foresaid river stood Tudenham and Wollaston, two townes of good antiquity, which Walter and Roger the brethren of Gislebert Lord of Clare wrested out of the Welch-mens hands, about the yeare 1160. Lidney. As also Lidney is adjoyning to them, where Sir William Winter, Vicead∣mirall of England, a renowned Knight for Sea-services (as his brother Arthur slaine in Orkeney-Isles ) built a faire house. But the most ancient towne of all others is ABONE or AVONE, Abone. mentioned by Antonine the Emperour in his Iourney-booke, which having not lost that name altogether, is at this day called Aventon: a small towne indeed, Aventon. but standing upon Severne, just nine miles, as hee writeth, from VENTASILVRVM, or Caer-went. And seeing that Avon in the Brittish tongue importeth A River, it shall be no strange thing, if we thinke it so called of the river: for in the very same signification, (that I may omit the rest) we have Waterton, Bourne, and Riverton: as the Latines had Aquinum and Fluentium. And I suppose the rather, that it tooke name of the ri∣ver, because people were wont at this place to ferry over the river, whereupon the towne standing over against it, is by Antonine called TRAIECTVS, that is, a passage or ferry: but without doubt, the number in that place set downe, is corrupted. For he maketh it nine miles betweene TRAIECTVS and ABONE, Trajectus. whereas the river is scarce three miles broad. It may seeme then to have beene utterly decaied, or turned rather into a village, either when as passengers began to ferry over below, or when Athelstane thrust out the Welsh Britans from hence. For, hee was the first that drave them, as William of Malmesbury witnesseth, beyond the river Wye. And where as before his time, Severne was the bound, betweene the English and Welshmen, hee appointed Wye to be the limit confining them both: Whence our Necham writeth thus. Inde vagos vaga Cambrenses, hinc respicit Anglos. To Wales on this side, looketh Wie, On that againe, our England he doth eye. S. Breulais. Not farre from Wye amongst blind by-wayes beset with thicke plumps of trees, ap∣peareth Breulis Castle more than halfe fallen downe, remarkable for the death of Ma∣hel youngest sonne of Miles, Earle of Hereford. For there, his greedy devises, bloody crueltie, and covetousnesse ready to pray upon other mens estates (for which vices hee is much blamed in Writers) were overtaken with a just revenge from heaven. For, as Girald hath written, being entertained guest-wise by Sir Walter Clifford in this Castle, when the house was all on a light fire, hee was killed with a stone that from the top of an high Turret fell upon his head and brained him. Neither have I any thing else to be recounted in this wood-countrey beside Newn∣ham a pretty mercate, and Westbury thereby a seate of the Bainhams of ancient descent: But that Herbert who had wedded the sister of the said Mahel Earle of Hereford, in her right was called Lord of Deane frō whom that Noble house of the Herberts fetcheth their pedigree, out of which family came the Lords of Blanleveney, and of late daies, the Herberts Earles of Huntingdon and Pembroch, with others. From hence also, if wee may believe David Powell in his historie of Wales, was descended Antonie Fitz-Herbert, whose great learning and industrie in the wisedome of our law, both the judi∣ciall Court of Flees, wherein he sate Iustice a long time, and also those exact bookes of our common law by him exquisitely penned and published, doe sufficiently wit∣nesse. But other have drawne his descent and that more truly, if I have insight there∣in, from the race of the Fitz-Herberts Knights in Derby shire. The river Severn, Severne. called by the Britains HAFFREN, after it hath run a long course with a channell somewhat narrow, no sooner entereth into this shire, but entertaineth the river Avon, and another brooke comming from the East. Betwixt which, is seated Tewkesbury, Tewkesbury. in the Saxon tongue , by others Theoci Curia, taking the name from one Theocus who there did lead an Eremites life. It is a great and faire towne, having three bridges to passe over, standing upon three rivers, famous for making of Wollen cloath, Mustard. and the best mustard; which for the quicke heate that it hath, biteth most and pierceth deepest: but most famous in times past by reason of an anci∣ent Monastery which Dodo a man of great power in Mercia founded in the yeare 715, where before time he kept his royall court, as is testified by this inscription which there remained long after. HANC AVLAM REGIAM DODO DVX CONSECRARI FECIT IN ECCLESIAM. THIS ROIAL PALACE DVKE DODO CAVSED TO BE CONSECRATED FOR A CHVRCH. And Odo his brother endowed the same, which being by continuance of time, and the fury of enemies ruinated, Robert FITZ-HAIMON the Norman, Lord of Corboile and Thorigny in Normandie reedified, translating monks from Cranborn in Dorsetshire hither upon a devout mind verily and a religious, that he might make some amends to the Church, for the losse that the Church of Baieux in Normandie had sustained: which K. Henry the first for to free him from his enemies had set on fire and burned, and afterwards repenting that which he had done, built againe. It cannot, (writeth William of Malmesbury ) be easily reported, how highly Robert Fitz-hamon exalted this Monastery, wherin the beauty of the buildings ravished the eies, and the charity of the Monks allured the hearts of such folke as used to come thither, Within this both himselfe and his successours Earles of Glocester were buried: who had a Castle of their owne called Holmes hard by, which now is almost vanished out of sight. Neither is this towne lesse memorable for that battell, whereby the house of Lancaster received a mortal wound: as wherein very many of their side in the yeere, 1471. were slaine, more taken priso∣ners and divers beheaded, their power so weakened and their hopes abated, especi∣ally because young Prince Edward the only sonne of King Henry the sixt, a very child, was there put to death, and in most shamefull and villanous manner his braines dash∣ed out, as that never after they came unto the field against King Edward the Fourth. In which respect, Iohn Leland wrote of this towne in this wise: Ampla foro, & partis spoliis praeclara, Theoci Curia, sabrinae quà se committit Avona Fulget; nobilium sacrísque recondit in antris Multorum cineres, quondam inclyta corpora bello. Where Av'n and Severn meete in one, there stands a goodly towne. For mercat great and pillage rich there wonne, of much renowne, Hight Tewkesburie: where noble men entombed many are, Now gone to mould, who sometimes were redoubted Knights in warre. From thence we come to Deorhirst, which Bede speaketh of, scituate somewhat low upon the banke of Severn, wherby it hath great losses many times, when he over-floweth his bounds. It had in it sometimes a little Monasterie, which being by the Danes overthrowne flourished againe at length under Edward the Confessor ; who, as we read in his Testament, assigned The religious place at Deorhirst and the government thereof to Saint Denis neere unto Paris. Yet, a little while after, as William of Malmes∣bury saith, It was but a vaine and void representation of antiquitie. Over against it lieth a place halfe incompassed in with Severne, called in the Saxon tongue , and Alney, now the Eight, that is, The Iland: Famous, by the reason of this occurrence, that when both the Englishmen and the Danes were much weakened with continuall en∣counters, to make a finall dispatch at once of all quarrels, the Fortune and destinie of both nations was committed to Edmund King of the English, and to Canutus King of the Danes, who in this Iland by a single combate tried it out, unto whether of them the right of this Realme should belong. But after they had fought and given over on e∣ven hand, a peace was concluded, and the kingdome divided betweene them. But when streight upon it Edmund was dispatched out of the way not without suspicion of poison, Canutus seized into his owne hands all England. From Deorhirst Severne runneth downe by Haesfield which King Henry the Third gave to Rich. Pauncefote, Paunce∣fote, or Pauncevolt. Placita 15. Edw. 1. whose successours built a faire house heere, and whose pre∣decessours were possessed of faire lands in this Countrey before, and in the Conque∣rours time in Wiltshire making many reaches winding in and out, and forthwith di∣viding himselfe to make a river Iland most rich and beautifull in greene meddowes, he passeth along by the head Citie of this Shire, which Antonine the Emperour cal∣led CLEVVM and GLEVVM, the Britans terme Caer Gloviè, the English Saxons , we Glocester, the Vulgar sort of Latinists Glovernia, others Claudiocestria, of the Emperour Claudius, as they imagine: who forsooth, should give it this name, when hee had bestowed heere his daughter Genissa in marriage upon Arviragus the Britan. Touching whom, Iuvenall writeth thus, Regem aliquem capies, vel de temone Britanno Excidet Arviragus. Some King (sure) thou shalt prisoner take in chase or battaile heat, Or else Arviragus shall loose his British royall seate. As though hee had begat any other daughters of his three wives besides Claudia, Antonia and Octavia ; or as if Arviragus had beene knowne in that age, whose name was never heard of before Domitians time and scarce then. But, let them goe, that seeke to build antiquitie upon a frame grounded on lies: Rather yet would I give my voice and accord with Ninnius, who writeth, That it tooke the name from Glovus, the great grandfathers father of King Vortigern ; but that long before it, Antonine had na∣med it Glevum (which, both the Distance from Corinium and the name also may prove.) But as the Saxon name Gleavecester came from Glevum, so Glevum propor∣tionably from the British, Caer Glow which I suppose sprong from the word Glow, that in the British tongue signifieth Faire and Goodly: so that Caer Glow may bee as much as to say, a faire Citie: In which signification also, the Greekes had their Calli∣polis: Callidromos, Callistratia: the English men their Brightstow, and Shirley, and in this very Countie Faireford, Faire-ley, &c. This Citie was built by the Romans, and set, as it were upon the necke of the Si∣lures to yoake them. And there also was a Colonie planted to people it, which they called COLONIA GLEVVM. For I have seene a fragment of antique stone in the walles of Bath neere unto the North-gate, with this Inscription. Decurio. DEC COLONIAE GLEV VIXIT ANN. LXXXVI. It lieth stretched out in length over Severne: on that side where it is not watered with the river, it hath in some places a very strong wall for defence. A proper and fine Citie I assure you it is, both for number of Churches and for the buil∣dings. On the South part there was a lofty Castle of square Ashler stone which, now for the most part, is nothing but a ruine. It was built in King William the first his time, and sixteene houses there about, as wee read in the booke of Englands Survey, were plucked downe for the rearing of this Castle. About which, Roger the sonne of Miles, Constable of Glocester went to law with King Henry the second: and his brother Walter lost all the right and interest hee had in this City and Castle, as Robert de Mont hath written. Ceaulin King of the West Saxons, was the first, that about the yeare of our redemption 570. by force and armes wrested Glocester out of the Britans hands. After this, the Mercians won it, under whom it flourished in great honour, and Osricke King of Northumberland by permission of Etheldred the Mercian, founded there a very great and stately Monastery for Nunnes, over whom Kineburg, Eadburg and Eve Queenes of the Mercians were Prioresses successively one after another. Edelfled also that most noble Ladie of the Mercians, adorned this City with a Church, wherein shee her selfe was buried, and not long after, when the Danes had spoyled and wasted the whole countrey, 878. those sacred Virgins were throwne out, and The Danes (as Aethelward that ancient authour writeth) with many a stroake pitched poore cottages into the citie of Glenv∣cester. At which time, when those more ancient Churches were subverted, Aldred Archbishop of Yorke, and Bishop of Worcester erected another for Monkes which is now the chiefe Church in the Citie, and hath a Deane and sixe Prebendaries. But the same in these late precedent ages was newly beautified. For, Iohn Hanley and Thomas Farley two Abbats added unto it the Chappel of the blessed Virgin Mary: N. Morwent raised from the very foundation the forefront, which is an excellent piece of worke: G. Horton an Abbat, adjoyned to it the crosse North-part; Abbat Trowcester a most dain∣tie and fine Cloister, and Abbat Sebrok an exceeding high faire steeple. As for the South side, it was also repaired with the peoples offerings at the Sepulcher of the un∣happy King Edward the second, who lieth heere enterred under a monument of Ala∣baster: and not farre from him another Prince as unfortunate as hee, Robert Curt-hose, the eldest sonne of King William the Conquerour Duke of Normandy within a woodden painted tombe in the midest of the quire, Robert Curt-hose. who was bereft of the Kingdome of Eng∣land for that he was borne before his father was King, deprived of his two sonnes the one by strange death in the New-forrest, the other dispoiled of the Earledome of Flan∣ders his inheritance, and slaine; he himselfe dispossessed of the Dukedome of Norman∣die by his brother King Henry the first, his eies plucked out, and kept close prisoner 26. yeares with all contumelious indignities untill through extreame anguish hee ended his life. Above the quire, in an arch of this church, there is a wall built in forme of a semicircle full of corners, with such an artificiall device, that if a man speake with ne∣ver so low a voice at the one part thereof, and another lay his eare to the other being a good way distant, he may most easily heare every sillable. In the reigne of William the Conquerour and before, it may seeme that the chiefest trade of the Citizens was to make Iron. For as we find in the Domes-day-booke. Survey booke of England, the King demanded in manner no other tribute than certaine Icres of Iron, and Iron barres, for the use of the Kings Navy, and some few Sextarios. quarts of hony. After the comming in of the Normans, it suffered divers calamities: by the hands of Edward, King Henry the third his sonne; whiles England was all on a smoake and cumbustion by the Barons warre, it was spoi∣led; and afterward by casualty of fire almost wholy consumed to ashes; but now cherished with continuance of long peace it flourisheth againe as fresh as ever it was, and by laying unto it two Hundreds, it is made a County, and called the County of the Ci∣tie of Glocester. Also within the memory of our fathers, King Henry the Eighth aug∣mented the state thereof with an Episcopall See, with which dignitie in old time it had beene highly endowed, as Geffery of Monmouth avoucheth, and I will not derogate ought from the credit of his assertion, considering that among the Prelates of Britaine the Bishop Cluviensis is reckoned, which name derived from Clevum or Glow, doth af∣ter a sort confirme and strengthen my coniecture, that this is that Glevum, whereof Antonine maketh mention. Severne, having now left Glocester behind it, and gathered his waters unto one streame againe, * windeth it selfe by Elmore a Mansion house of the Gises, ancient by their owne lineall descent, Elmore. being in elder times owners of Apsely-Gise neere Brick∣hill: and from the Beauchamps of Holt, who acknowledge Huber de Burgo Earle of Kent (whom I lately mentioned) beneficious to them, and testifie the same by their Armories. Lower upon the same side Stroud a pretty river slideth into Severne out of Coteswold by Stroud a Mercat towne sometimes better peopled with Clothiers, and not farre from Minching-Hampton which anciently had a Nunnery, Minching. or belonged to Nunnes whom our ancestors named Minchings. Now Severn waxing broader and deeper by reason of the alternative flowing and ebbing of the sea, riseth and swelleth in manner of a rough and troublous sea indeed, and so with many windings and turnings in, and out, speedeth him unto the Ocean. But nothing offereth it selfe unto his sight, (to count of) as hee passeth along, but Cam-bridge a little country towne: where it receiveth Cam a small rivelet: Over the bridge whereof, when the Danes with rich spoiles passed (as Aethelward writeth) Cam-bridge. in battail-ray, the West-Saxons and the Mercians received them with an hote battaile in Wood¦nesfield, where three of their Pettie Kings were slaine, namely, Heatfden, Cinvil and Inguar. * On the same shore not much beneath, standeth Barkley, in the Saxon-tongue , Barkley▪ See Bristow in Somerset∣shire. of great name for a most strong Castle, a Major, who is the Head Magi∣strate, and especially for the Lords thereof descended from Robert-Fitz-Harding to whom King Henry the second gave this place, and Barkely Hearnes. Out of this house are branched many Knights and Gentlemen of signall note, and in the reigne of King Henry the seventh flourished William Lord Barkely, who was honoured by King Ed∣ward the fourth with the stile of Viscount Barkely, by King Richard the third with the honour of Earle of Nottingham (in regard of his mother daughter of Thomas Moubray Duke of Norfolke, and Earle of Nottingham) and by King Henry the Seventh with the office of Marshall of England, and dignity of Marquis Barkely. But for that he died issuelesse, these his titles died together with him. If you be willing to know by what a crafty fetch Goodwin Earle of Kent, a man most deeply pregnant in devising how to do injury, got the possession of this place, you may read these few lines out of Wal. Mapae∣us, who flourished 400. yeares ago: and worth the reading, (believe me) they are. Bark∣ley neere unto Severn is a towne of 500. pounds revenew. In it there was a Nunnery, and the Abbesse over these Nunnes was a Noble woman and a beautifull. Goodwins fraudulent fetch. Earle Goodwin by a cunning and subtill wile, desiring not her selfe, but hers, as he passed that way, left with her a Nephew of his, a very proper and beautifull young Gentleman (pretending that hee was sickly) untill he returned backe. Him he had given this lesson, that hee should keepe his bed and in no wise seeme to be recovered untill he had got both her and as many of the Nunnes as hee could with child as they came to visite him. De honestis, nustas. And to the end that the young man might obtaine their favour and his owne full purpose, when they visited him: the Earle gave unto him pretty rings and fine girdles to bestow for favours upon them, and thereby to deceive them. Hee therefore being willing entred into this course of libidinous pleasure (for that the way downe to hell is easie) was soone taught his lessons, and wisely playeth the foole in that, which seemed wise in his own conceit. With him they were restant all those things that the foolish virgins could wish for, beauty, daintie delicates, riches, faire speech; and carefull he was now to single them alone. The Devill therefore thrust out Pallas, brought in Venus, and made the Church of our Saviour and his Saints, an accursed Temple of all Idols; and the Shrine, a very stewes, and so of pure Lambes, hee made them foule shee-wolves, and of pure virgins, filthy harlots. Now when many of their bellies bare out big and round, this youth being by this time over wearied with conquest of pleasure, getteth him gone, and forthwith bringeth home againe unto his Lord and Master, a victorious Ensigne, worthy to have the re∣ward of iniquitie: and to speake plaine, relateth what was done. No sooner heard he this, but he hieth him to the King: enformeth him how the Lady Abbesse of Barkely and her Nuns were great with child, and commonly prostitute to every one that would: sendeth speciall mes∣sengers of purpose for enquirie heereof, proveth all that he had said. Hee beggeth Berkley of the King his Lord after the Nuns were thrust out, and obtained it at his hands: and he left it to his wife Gueda: but because she her selfe (so saith Doomes-day booke, ) would eat no∣thing that came out of this Manour, for that the Nunnery was destroied▪ he purchased for her Vdecester, that thereof she might live, so long as she made her abode at Barkley. Thus wee see, a good and honest mind abhorreth whatsoever is evill gotten. How King Edward the second being deposed from his Kingdome through the crafty complotting and practise of his wife, was made away in the Castle heere, by the wicked subtiltie of Adam Bishop of Hereford, who wrote unto his keepers these few words without points betweene them: K. Edward the second murdred. Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est: that by reason of their diverse sense and construction, both they might commit the murther, and he also cleanly excuse himselfe, I had rather you should seeke in Histo∣rians, than looke for at my hands. Beneath this Barkley, the little river Avon closely entereth into the Sea, at the head whereof scarse eight miles from the waterside, upon the hils neere Alderley a small towne, Wilkes of stone or Shell-fish ston fied. there are found certaine stones resembling Coccles or Periwinckles and Oysters: which, whether they have beene sometimes living creatures, or the gamesom sports of Nature, I leave it to Philosophers (that hunt after natures works.) But Fracastorius the principall Philosopher in this our age; maketh no doubt, but that they were living creatures engendred in the Sea, and by waters brought to the mountaines. For, he affirmeth, that mountaines were cast up by the Sea, with the driving at first of sand into heapes and hillocks: Shell-fish stonified. also that the sea flowed there where now hilles doe rise aloft: and that as the said Sea retired the hilles also were discove∣red. But this is out of my race. TRAIECTVS, that is, The ferry, whereof Antonine the Emperour maketh menti∣on over against Abone, where they were wont to passe over Severne salt water by boate, was in times past as I guesse by the name, at Oldbury, which is by interp e ∣tion, The Old Burgh: like as we doe ferry, in these daies at Aust, a little towne some∣what lower. This in ancient times was called Aust clive: for, a great craggy cliffe it is endeed, mounting up a great height. And verily, memorable is the thing which that Mapaeus whom I spake of writeth to have beene done in this place. Edward the elder, saith he, Lay at Austclive, and Leolin Prince of Wales at Bethesley: now when Leolin would not come downe to parley, nor crosse Severn, Edward passeth over to Leolin; whom when Leolin saw and knew who he was, hee cast off his rich robe (for hee had prepared himselfe to sit in judgement) entred the water brest-high, and clasping the boat with an embrace, said, Most wise and sage King, thy humility hath overcome my insolency, and thy wisedome triumphed over my folly: Come, get upon my necke which I have (foole as I am) lifted up against thee, and so shalt thou enter into that land, which thy benigne mildnesse hath made thine owne this day:) and after he had taken him upon his shoulders, hee would needs have him sit upon his roabe aforesaid, and so putting his owne hands joyntly into his, did him homage. Upon the same shore also is situate Thornebury, where are to be seene the foundations brought up above ground of a sumptuous and stately house which Ed∣ward the last Duke of Buckingham, was in hand to build, in the yeare of our Lord, (as the engraving doth purport) 1511. when he had taken downe an ancient house which Hugh Audeley E. of Glocester had formerly built seven miles from hence, Avon shea∣ding it selfe into Severn running crosse before it, maketh a division betweene Gloce∣stershire, and Sommersetshire, and not farre from the banke thereof, Pucle-Church appea∣reth, being in times past a towne or Manour of the Kings called Pucle-Kerkes, wherein Edmund King of England, whiles he interposed himselfe betweene his Sewer, and one Leove a most vilanous wretch, The Brad∣stones. for to part and end certaine quarrels betweene them was thrust through the body, and so lost his life. Nere bordering upon this place are two townes; Winterburne, which had for their Lords the Bradstons, amongst whom S. Thomas was summoned amongst the Barons in the time of King Edward the Third. From whom the Vicounts Montacute, the Barons of Wentworth, &c. fetch their descent: Acton, which gave name to the house of the Actons, Knights: whose heire, being married unto Nicolas Points Knight in K. Edward the second his daies, Deorham. Marianus. left the same to their off-spring: Derham a little towne, in the Saxons tongue , where Ceaulin the Saxon slew three Princes or chiefe Lords of the Britans, Commeail, Condidan and Fariemeiol, with others, whom he like∣wise put to the sword and dispossessed the Britans of that countrie for ever. There remaine yet in that place huge rampie s and trenches as fortifications of their campes, and other most apparent monuments here and there of so great a war. This was the chiefe seat of the Barony of Iames of New-merch. Iames de novo Mercatu, who begat three daughters, wedded to Nicholas de Moelis, Iohn de Boteraux, and Ralph Russell: one of whose posterity, enriched by matching with the heire of the ancient family of Gorges, assumed unto them the name of Gorges. But from Ralph Russell the heire this Deor∣ham descended to the family of Venis. Above these is Sodbury knowne by the fami∣lie of Walsh, and neighbours thereunto are Wike-ware the ancient seat of the familie De-la-ware, * Woton under Edge, which yet remembreth the slaughter of Sir. Thomas Talbot Vicount Lisle heere slaine in the time of King Edward the Fourth in an encoun∣ter with the Lord Barkley, De-la-ware. Wotton un∣der Edge. Vicount Lisle. about possessions, since which time have continued suites betweene their posterity untill now, lately they were finally compounded. More Northward I had sight of Durisley reputed the ancientest habitation of the Barkleyes, hereupon stiled Barkleis of Duresley, who built here a Castle now more than ruinous, and were accounted founders of the Abbey of Kings-wood thereby for Cistertian Monkes, Douresley. derived from Tintern whom Maud the Empresse greatly enriched. The males of this house failed in the time of King Richard the Second, and the heire gene∣rall was married to Cantelow. Inq. 6. R. 2. Vleigh. Within one mile of this, where the river Cam lately spo∣ken of, springeth, is Vleigh, a seat also of the Barkeleis descended from the Barons Barke∣ley, stiled of Vleigh, Escaetria. 8. H. 4. Beverston Castle. and Stoke Giffard, who were found coheires to I. Baron Boutetort, descended from the Baron Zouch of Richards Castles, alias Mortimer, and the Somerus Lords of Dueley, Beverston Castle not farre of Eastward appertained also to the name of Barkeleies, but in former times to the Gournois, and Ab-Adam a Baron in the time of King Edward the First. Cotswould. Would what it is in English Hitherto have we cursorily passed over the principall places in this Shire situate be∣yond and upon Severn, and not far from his banke: Now proceede we forward to the East part, which I said riseth up with hilles, to wit, Cotteswold, which of woulds, and Cotes, that is, hils and Sheepfolds tooke that name. For, mountaines and hils without woods, the Englishmen in old time termed Woulds : whence it is that an Old Glossary interpreteth Alpes Italie, The Woulds of Italie. In these Woulds there feed in great numbers, flockes of sheepe, long necked and square of bulke and bone, by reason (as it is commonly thought) of the weally and hilly situation of their pasturage: whose wool being most fine and soft is had in passing great account among all nations. Vn∣der the side of these hils, and among them are to be seene, as it were, in a row neigh∣bouring together, these places following, of more antiquity than the rest, beginning at the North-east end of them. Campden. Campden, commonly Camden, a mercat towne well peopled and of good resort, where, as Iohn Castoreus writeth, all the Kings of Saxon bloud assembled in the yeare of Salvation 689. and consulted in common about making war upon the Britans. In William the Conquerours time this Weston and Biselay were in the possession of Hugh Earle of Chester, Inqui. 2. Ed∣ward 1. and from his posterity came at last by Nicolaa de Albeniaco an inhe∣rice to the ancient Earles of Arundel unto Roger de Somery. Neere unto it standeth the said Weston, a place now to bee remembred in regard of a faire house, which maketh a goodly shew a farre off, built by Ralph Sheldon for him and his Posterity. Hales in late time a most flourishing Abbay built by Richard Earle of Cornwall and King of Romanes, Hales. * who was there buried with his Wife Sanchia daughter to the Earle of Province: Alexander of Hales, he flou∣rished. and deserving commendation for breeding up of Alexander of Hales a great Clerke and so deepely learned above all others in that subtile and deepe Divinity of the Schoole men, 1230. as he carryed away the sirname of Doctor Irre∣fragabilis, that is, Doctor un∣gain-said. Sudley. the Doctor ungain-said, as he that could not be gain-said. Sudley, in times past Sudlengh, a very faire Castle, the seat not long since of Sir Tho∣mas Seimor Baron Seimor of Sudley, and Admirall of England, attainted in the time of king Edward the Sixth, and afterward of Sir John Bruges whom Queene Mary created Baron Chandos of Sudley ; Barons of Chan. because he derived his pedegree from the ancient fa∣mily of Chandos ; out of which there flourished in the raigne of Edward the third Sir John Chandos a famous Baneret Vicount of Saint Saviours, See Banerets before. Barons of Sudley. L▪ of Caumont, and Kerkito in France, a martiall man, and for military Prowesse every way most renowned. But in old time certaine Noblemen here dwelt, and of it had their addition de Sudley, descended of a right ancient English Race, to wit from Gorda K. Aetheldreds daughter, whose son Ralph Medantinus Earle of Hereford begat Harold L. of Sudley, whose progeny flouri∣shed here a long time, untill for default of issue male, the daughter and heire matched in marriage with Sir William Butler of the family of Wem, 20. H. 6. and brought him a sonne named Thomas: and he begat Ralph, Lord Treasurer of England, created by king Henry the Sixth Baron of Sudley, Escaetria 13. Edward 4. with a fee of 200. markes yearely, who repaired this castle and enlarged it with new buildings. His sisters and coheires were married unto the houses of Northbury and Belk ape: and by their posterity the possessions in short time were divided into sundry Families. Todington. Toddington also is next adjoyning hereunto, where the Tracies Gentlemen of a right worshipfull and ancient house flourished a long time, Tracies. who long since found the Barons of Sudley very bounteous unto them. But how in the first variance about Religion, William Tracy Lord of this place was procee∣ded against and punished after his death by digging up his corps and burning it open∣ly, for some few words put downe in his last Will and Testament, which savoured (as those times judged) of heresie: as also how another William de Tracy long before, em∣brued his hands in the bloudy murder of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, the Ecclesiasticall Historiographers have written at large, and it is no part of my purpose to relate such like matters. Winchel∣combe. There is heere likewise Winchelcombe a great Towne and well inhabited, wherein Kenulph the Mercian King erected an Abbay, and on the same day that hee hallowed and dedicated it, hee freed and sent home Edbricht a King of Kent, whom he had kept before his Prisoner. A man would hardly beleeve how much haunted and frequented this Abbay was long since, for the Reliques of King Kenelme a childe seven yeares old, whom his owne sister to get the Inheritance unto her selfe, secretly made away, and our forefathers registred in the ranke of holy Martyrs. The Territory adjoyning hereto in times past was reckoned a County by it selfe or a Sherif-dome: For, we read in an old manuscript, sometime belonging to the Church of Worcester, in this wise, Edris sirnamed Stre na, that is, The getter, or gainer, who first under King Aetheldred, and afterwards for a good while under Cnut or Canut governed the whole Kingdome of England, Sherif-dome. and ruled as Vice Roy, adjoyned the Sherif-dome of Winchelcombe which was then an entire thing by it selfe, * unto the shire of Glocester. Thence I found nothing memorable, Coberley. but neere the fountaine of Churn River, Co∣berley, a seat of a stem of Barkeleies so often named even from the Conquest, which matched with an heire of Chandos, and so came hereditarily to the Bruges progeni∣tors to the Lords Chandos. Then by Bird-lip-hill, whereby we ascended unto this high Coteswold out of the vale, lyeth Brimsfield, which had for the L. thereof the Giffords in times past, unto whom in right of marriage there came a goodly inheritance from the Cliffords, Cliffords Barons. and streight waies by the female heires, the same fell to the Lords le Strange of Blackmer, to Audleies and divers others. Thus much of the places among the Woulds. But under the said Woulds I have seene that notable Roman high-way by a well knowne name called the Fosse, Fosse way. which out of Warwicke-shire commeth downe first by Lemington, (where it may seeme there was a Station of the Romanes by the peeces of Romane Coine ploughed there often times out of the ground: some of which Edward Palmer a curious and diligent Antiquary, whose Ancestors flourished heere a long-time, hath of his courtesie imparted unto mee) then, by Stow on the Would, where by reason of that high site, the Windes blow cold: and North-Leach bearing the name of a Riveret running hard by it: Circencester. and then to Circencester, which the River Corinus, now Churn rising among the Woulds neere Corberley, very commo∣dious for Milles, passeth by into the South, and so giveth it his name. This was a City of as great antiquity as any other, Corinium. called by Ptolomee CORINIUM, by An∣tonine the Emperour, DUROCORNOVIUM, that is, The water Cornovium, just fif∣teene miles from Glevum or Glocester, as hee noteth. The Britans named it Caer Cori, and Caer Ceri ; the English Saxon , wee in these dayes Circester, and Circiter. The ruinate wals doe plainely shew that it was very large: for, by report they tooke up two miles in compasse: That it was a famous place, the Romane Coines, the cherkerworke pavements, and the engraven marble stones that now and then are there digged up, (which, have beene broken and to no small prejudice of Antiquity) doe evidently testifie: A Romane port-way. As also the Port Consular wayes of the Romanes, that heere did crosse one another, whereof that which led to GLEVUM or Gloce∣ster, is yet extant with his high rigde evident to bee seene as farre as to Bird-lip-hill, and if a man looke well upon it, seemes to have beene paved with stone. The British Chronicles record, that this City was burnt being set on fire by Sparrowes, through a stratageme devised by one Gurmund, I wot not what Tyrant of Africke, whereupon Giraldus calleth it Passerum urbem, that is, the Sparrowes City: and out of those Chro∣nicles Necham writeth thus, Urbs vires experta tuas Gurmunde per annos Septem— This City felt for seven yeares space, Thy forces Gurmund — Who this Gurmund was I know not. The Inhabitants shew a Mount beneath the City which they report Gurmund did cast up, and yet they call it Grismunds Towre. Marianus an Historian of good antiquity and credit, reporteth, that Ceaulin King of the West Saxons dispossessed the Britans of it, what time hee had discomfited and put to flight their forces at Deorham, and brought Glocester to his subjection. Many yeares after this, it was subject to the West Saxons: for, wee reade, that Penda the Mercian was defeited by Cineglise King of the West Saxons, when hee besieged it with a mighty Army. Howbeit, at length both it, and the whole Territory and country came under subjection of the Mercians, and so continued untill the Eng∣lish Monarchie. Under which it sustained much sorrow and grievous calamity by the Danes: and peradventure at the hand of Gurmon that Dane, whom the Histo∣riographers call both Guthrus and Gurmundus. * So that it may seeme he was that Gur∣mund which they so much speake of. For certes when he raged, about the yeare 879. a rablement of Danes rousted heere one whole yeare. Now scarce the fourth part within the wals is inhabited: the remaines beside are pasture grounds and the ruines of an Abbay, built (as the report goeth) at first by the Saxons, and newly repaired af∣terwards by King Henry the First for Blacke Chanons, wherein, I heard say, that many of the family of the Barons de Samond. Sancto Amando were buried. But the Castle that it had, was by a Warrant from the King, overthrowne in the first yeare of Henry the Third his Raigne. The Townesmen raise the chiefe gaine by the Trade of Clo∣thing, and they make great reports of the singular bounty of King Richard the First towards them, who endowed the Abbay with lands: and (as they say themselves) made them Rulers of the seven Hundreds adjoyning, to hold the same jurisdiction in fee farme: by vertue whereof, they should have the hearing and determining of causes, and take unto themselves the fines, perquisites, amercements, and other profites growing out of the trials of such causes. Moreover King Henry the Fourth granted unto them certaine priviledges in consideration of their good and valiant service performed against Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, late Duke of Surrey, Iohn Holland Earle of Huntingdon, late Duke of Excester, Iohn Montacute Earle of Salisbury, Thomas de Spenser Earle of Glocester, and others, who being by him dispoiled of their honors, and maligning his usurpation, conspired to take away his life, and here, by the townes∣men intercepted, were some of them slaine outright, and others beheaded. The river Churne when it hath left Circester behinde him, six miles Isis, after∣wards Tamisis. neere to Dou∣namveny an ancient seate of the Hungerfords, joyneth with Isis. For, ISIS, common∣ly called Ouse, that it might bee by originall of Glocester-shire, hath his head there, and with lively springs floweth out of the South border of this shire nere unto Tor∣leton an upland Village, not farre from that famous Port-way, called the Fosse. This is that Isis which afterwards entertaineth Tame, and by a compound word is called Tamisis, Soveraigne as it were of all the Britain Rivers in Britaine: of which a man may well and truely say as ancient Writers did of Euphrates in the East part of the World: that it doth both Sow and Water the best part of Britaine. The poeticall description of whose Source or first head, I have heere put downe out of a Poem entituled The Marriage of Tame and Isis, which whether you admit or omit, it skil∣leth but little. Lanigeros quà lata greges Cotswaldia pascit, Crescit & in colles faciles, visura Dobunos, Haud procul à Fossa longo spelunca recessu Cernitur, abrupti surgente crepidine clivi: Cujus inauratis resplendent limina tophis, Atria tegit ebur, tectúmque Gagate Britanno Emicat, alterno solidantur pumice postes. Materiam sed vincit opus, cedúntque labori Artifici tophus, pumex, ebur, atque Gagates. Pingitur hinc vitrei moder atrix Cynthia regni Passibus obliquis volventia sydera lustrans: Oceano tellus conjuncta marita marito Illinc caelatur, fraternáque flumina Ganges, Nilus, Fosse way. Amazonius, tractúsque binominis Istri, Vicini & Rheni: sed & his intermicat auro Vellere Phrixae dives, redimitáque spicis Clara triumphatis erecta BRITANNIA Gallis, &c. Vndoso hîc solio residet regnator aquarum ISIS, fluminea qui majestate verendus Caeruleo gremio esupinat prodigus urnam, Intonsos crines i vis & arundine cinctus, Cornua cana liqu nt, fluitantia lumina lymphis Dispergunt lucem, propexa in pectore barba Tota madet, toto distillant corpore guttae: Et salientis aquae prorumpunt undique venae. Pisciculi liquidis penetralibus undique ludunt, Plurimus & cygnus niveis argenteus alis Pervolitat circum, &c. Where Cotswald spred abroad doth lie and feed faire flocks of sheepe, And Dobunes for to see in downes ariseth nothing steepe, Within a nouke along not much the Fosse and it betweene, Just at the rising of a banke upright, a Cave is seene, Whereof the entry glistereth with soft stones richly guilt, The Haull is seel'd with Ivory, the roufe aloft ybuilt Of Geat the best that Britaine yeelds: The pillers very strong, With Pumish laid each other course are raised all along. The stuffe full faire, yet Art doth it surpasse, and to the feate Of Artisan, give place the gold, stones, Yv'ry, and Geat. Heere painted is the Moone that rules the Sea like Chrystall Glasse, As she through rolling Signes above with traverse course doth passe, And there againe enchaced are both land and Ocean wide, Conjoyn'd as man and wife in one, with Rivers great beside, Like brethren all, as Ganges rich, strange Nilus, Tanais, Yea and the course of Ister large, which Ister, and Danubius. double named is, Of Rhene also a neighbour streame. And heere bedight in gold, Among them glitt'reth Britanny with riches manifold Of golden fleece; a Coronet of Wheat-eares she doth weare, And for her triumph over France, her head aloft doth reare, &c. In waving Throne heere sits the King of waters all and some ISIS, who in that Majestie which Rivers doth become, All rev'rend, from his watchet lap powr's forth his streame amaine With weed and reed his haires tuckt up that grow both long and plaine, His hoary hornes distilling runne, with water stand his eyes, And shoot from them a lustre farre: his kembed beard likewise, Downe to the brest wet-through doth reach: his body drops againe, All over and on every side breakes out some water veine. In secret watrish room's within the little fishes play, And many a silver Swan besides, his white wings doth display, And flutter round about, &c. Earles of Glo∣cester. As touching the Earles of Glocester ; some there be, who have thrust upon us one William Fitz-Eustace, for the first Earle: who this was, I have not yet found, and I verily beleeve hee is yet unborne. The History of Tewkesbury Abbay. But that which I have found, I will not con∣ceale from the Reader. About the comming in of the Normans, wee reade that one Bithricke an English Saxon was Lord of Glocester, whom Maud wife to Willi∣am Conquerour, upon a secret rankor and hatred conceived against him for his con∣tempt of her beauty (for, Bithrick had before time refused to marry her) troubled and molested most maliciously. And when shee had at length cast him in Prison, Robert Fitz-Haimon Lord of Corboile in Normandy, Fitz-Haimon. William of Malmesbury. was by the King endowed with his pos∣sessions, who in a battaile having received a wound with the push of a pike upon the temples of his head, had his wits crackt therewith, and survived a good while after, as a man bestraught and madde. His daughter Mabil, whom others name Sibill, Robert the base sonne of King Henry the First by the intercession of his father, obtained for his wife, but not before he had made him Earle of Glocester. This is hee who is called commonly by Writers The Consull of Glocester. A man of an haughty valorous minde and undaun∣ted heart, as any one in that age; and who being never dejected with any adversity, wanne great praise for his fidelity and worthy exploits in the behalfe of his sister Maude the Empresse against Stephen then usurping the Crowne of England. Register of Keinsham Abbay, and Tewkesbury. This honourable Title left he unto his son William, who dejected with comfortlesse griefe when death had deprived him of his onely son and heire, assured his estate with his eldest daughter to Iohn son to King Henry the Second, with certaine provisoes for his other daughters. Yet his three daughters brought this Earldome into as many fa∣milies. For Iohn when he had obtained the Kingdome repudiated her upon pretenses, as well that she was barren, as that they were within prohibited degrees of consan∣guinity: and reserving the Castle of Bristow to himselfe, Pat. 15. Joan. R. 4. after some time, passed over his repudiated wife with the Honor of Glocester, to Geffrey Mandevil son of Geffrey Fitz Peter, Earle of Essex for 20000. markes, who thus over-marrying himselfe was greatly impoverished, and wounded in Tournament died soone after issuelesse: and she being remarried to Hubert of Burgh died immediately. Then K. Iohn upon an exchange gran∣ted the Earldome of Glocester to Almary Earle of Eureux, son to the eldest daughter of the foresaid E. William, who enjoyed it a short time dying also without issue. So by Amice the second daughter of the forenamed Earle William married to Richard de Clare Earle of Hertford, Earles of Glo∣cester and Hertford. this Earledome descended to Gilbert her sonne, who was stiled Earle of Glocester and Hertford, and mightily enriched his house by marrying one of the heires of William Marshall Earle of Pembroch. His sonne and successour Richard in the beginning of the Barons warres against king Henry the Third ended his life, leaving Gilbert his sonne to succeed him, who power∣fully and prudently swaied much in the said wars, as he inclined to them or the king. He obnoxious to King Edward the First, surrendred his lands unto him, and received them againe by marrying Joane the Kings Daughter (sirnamed of Acres in the Holy∣land because shee was there borne) to his second Wife, who bare unto him Gilbert Clare last Earle of Glocester of this sirname, slaine in the flower of his youth in Scot∣land at the battaile of Sterling in the 6. yeare of K. Edward the second. Howbeit while this Gilbert the third was in minority, Sir Ralph de Mont-hermer who by a secret con∣tract had espoused his mother the Kings daughter (for which he incurred the kings high displeasure, and a short imprisonment) but after reconciled was summoned to Parliaments by the name of Earle of Glocester and Hertford. But when Gilbert was out of his minority, he was summoned amongst the Barons by the name of Sir Ralph de Mont-hermer, as long as he lived, which I note more willingly for the rarenesse of the example. Thomas De La Mare in the life of Edward . After the death of Gilbert the third without children Sir Hugh Le De-Spenser (commonly named Spenser ) the younger, was by writers called Earle of Gloce∣ster, because he had married the eldest sister of the said Gilbert the third. But after that he was by the Queene and Nobles of the Realme hanged, for hatred they bare to K. Edward the 2. whose minion he was; Sir Hugh Audley, who had matched in marri∣age with the second sister, through the favour of King Edward the Third, received this honour. After his death King Richard the Second erected this Earledome into a Dukedome, and so it had three Dukes and one Earle betweene: and unto them all it prooved Equus Sejanus, that is, Fatall to give them their fall. Thomas of Woodstocke youngest sonne to King Edward the Third, was the first Duke of Glocester advanced to that high honour by the said King Richard the Second, and shortly after by him subverted. For when he busily plotted great matters, the King tooke order that he should be conveyed secretly in all haste to Calis, where with a featherbed cast upon him he was smouthered: having before under his owne band confessed (as it stands upon Record in the Parliament Rols ) that he by vertue of a Patent which hee had wre∣sted from the King, tooke upon him the Kings regall authority, that he came armed into the Kings presence, reviled him, consulted with learned about renouncing his allegiance, and devised to depose the King: for which being now dead he was by au∣thority of Parliament attainted and condemned of high Treason. When hee was thus dispatched, the same King conferred the Title of Earle of Glocester upon Tho∣mas Le De-Spenser in the right of his Great Grand-mother; who within a while after sped no better than his great Grand-father Sir Hugh. For by King Henry the fourth he was violently displaced, shamefully degraded, and at Briston by the peoples fury beheaded. After some yeares King Henry the Fifth created his brother Humfrey, the second Duke of Glocester, who stiled himselfe the first yeare of King Henry the Sixth, as I have seene in an Instrument of his, Humfrey by the Grace of God, sonne, bro∣ther, and Uncle to Kings, Duke of Glocester, Earle of Henault, Holland, Zeland, and Pen∣broch; Lord of Friesland, Great Chamberlaine of the Kingdome of England, Protector and Defender of the same Kingdome, and Church of England. A man that had right well de∣served of the common wealth and of learning, but through the fraudulent practise and malignant envie of the Queene brought to his end at Saint Edmunds Bury. The third and last Duke was Richard brother to King Edward the Fourth who afterwards ha∣ving most wickedly murdred his Nephewes, usurped the Kingdome, by the name of King Richard the third: and after two yeares lost both it and his life in a pitched field, finding by experience that power gotten by wicked meanes is never long lasting. Concerning this last Duke of Glocester, Richard the third King o England. and his first entry to the Crowne, give me leave for a while to play the part of an Historiographer, which I will speedily give over againe as not well able to act it. When this Richard Duke of Glocester be∣ing now proclaimed Protector of the Kingdome had under his command his tender two Nephewes, Edward the Fifth King of England, and Richard Duke of Yorke, he retriving after the Kingdome for himselfe, by profuse liberality and bounty to very many, by passing great gravitie tempered with singular affabilitie, by deepe wis∣dome, by ministring justice indifferently, and by close devises, wonne wholly to him all mens hearts, but the Lawyers especially to serve his turne. So shortly he effected that in the name of all the States of the Realme, there should be exhibited unto him a supplication, wherein they most earnestly besought him for the publike Weale of the Kingdome, to take upon him the Crowne, to uphold his Countrey, and the com∣mon-weale now shrinking and downe falling, not to suffer it to runne headlong into utter desolation; by reason that both lawes of nature, and the authority of positive lawes, and the laudable customes and liberties of England, wherein every English∣man is an inheritor, were subverted and trampled under foote through civill wars, rapines, murthers, extortions, oppressions, and all sorts of misery. But especially ever since that King Edward the fourth, his brother bewitched by sorcerie and amorous potions fell in fancie with Dame Elizabeth Greie widdow, whom he married without the assent of his Nobles, without solemne publication of Banes, secretly in a profane place, and not in the face of the Church, contrary to the law of Gods Church and commendable custome of the Church of England: and which was worse, having before time by a precontract espoused Dame Aeleanor Butler, She was mar∣ried first to R. Butler, L. of Sudley. daughter to the old Earle of Shrewsburie: whereby most sure and certaine it was, that the foresaid ma∣trimony was unlawfull and therewith the children of them begotten illegitimate, and so unable to inherite or claime the Crowne. Moreover considering that George Duke of Clarence the second brother of King Edward the Fourth, was by authority of Parliament convicted and attainted of high treason, thereupon his children disabled and debarred from all right succession; evident it was to every man, that Richard himselfe remained the sole and undoubted heire to the Crowne. Of whom they as∣sured themselves, that being borne in England he would seriously provide for the good of England, neither could they make any doubt of his birth, parentage, and Fi∣liation ; whose wisdome also, whose justice, princely courage, warlike exploits most valiantly atchieved in the defence of the State, and whose roiall birth and bloud, (as who was descended from the bloud roiall of the three most renowned Kingdomes of England, France, and Spaine) they knew assuredly. Wherefore having throughly weighed these and such like motives, they willingly and withall hearty affection ten∣dring the welfare of the land, by that their petition and one generall accord of them all elected him for their King, and with prayers and teares lying prostrate before him, humbly craved and besought his gracious favour to accept and take upon him the Kingdomes of England, France, and Ireland, appertaining to him by right of in∣heritance, and now presented to him by their free and lawfull election; and so for ve∣ry pitty and naturall zeale to reach forth unto his Countrey now forlorne his help∣ing hand, that after so great and grievous stormes the sonne of grace might shine up∣on them to the comfort of all true hearted English men: This supplication being ten∣dred privately to himselfe, before that he entred upon the Kingdome, was presented also afterwards unto him in the publike assembly of all the States of the Realme, and there allowed, and so by their authoritie enacted and published, with a number of words (as the maner is) heaped up together, that according to the law of God, the law of Nature, the lawes of England and most laudable custome, Richard was and is by lawfull election, Inauguration, and Coronation the undoubted King of Eng∣land, &c. and that the Kingdomes of England, France, and Ireland appertained rightfully to him and the heires of his body lawfully begotten. And to use the very words as they stand penned in the originall Record. By the authority of the Parliament it was pronounced, decreed and declared, that all, and singular the contents in the foresaid Bill were true and undoubted; and the Lord the King with the assent of the three States of the King∣dome, by the foresaid authoritie pronounceth, decreeth, and declareth the same, for true and undoubted. These things have I laid forth more at large out of the Parliament Rowle, that yee may understand, both what and how great matters, the power of a Prince, the outward shew of vertue, the wily fetches of Lawyers, fawning hope, pensive feare, desire of change, and goodly pretenses, are able to effect in that most wise as∣sembly of all the States of a Kingdome, even against all Law and right. But this Ri∣chard is not to be accounted worthy to have bin a Soveraigne had he not bin a So∣veraigne as Galba was reputed; who when he was a Soveraigne, deceived all mens expectation: but most worthy indeed of Soveraigntie, had he not being transpor∣ted with ambition (which blasteth all good parts) by lewd practises, and mischievous meanes made foule way thereunto. For that by the common consent of all that are wise, he was reckoned in the ranke of bad men, but of good Princes. Now remembring my selfe to be a Chorographer I will returne to my owne part, and leave these matters unto our Histo∣riographers, when God shall send them. In this Countie there are Parishes. 280. OXONIENSIS Comitatus vulgo Oxfordshyre qui pars olim DOBUNORUM OXFORD-SHIRE. O XFORD-SHIRE, in the Saxon Tongue , which, as we said, belonged also to the Dobuni, on the West side joyneth upon Glocester-shire, on the South, which way it runneth out farthest in breadth, is dissevered from Bark-shire, by the River Isis or Tamis: Eastward, it bordereth up∣on Buckingham-shire: and Northward where it endeth poin∣ted, in manner of a Cone, or Pine-apple, hath North-hamp∣ton-shire of one side, and Warwick-shire on the other side, con∣fining with it. It is a fertile Country and plentifull: wherein the Plaines are gar∣nished with Corne-fields and meddowes, the Hilles beset with Woods, stored in every place not onely with Corne and fruites, but also with all kinde of game for Hound, or Hawke; and well watered with fishfull Rivers. For ISIS, or OUSE which afterwards comes to bee named Tamis, maketh a long course and runneth un∣der the South side; Cherwell also a prety River well stored with fish, after it hath for a time parted North-hampton-shire and Oxford-shire passeth gently with a still streame through the middest of the Country, and divideth it, as it were, into two parts. And Tamis with his waters conforteth and giveth heart to the East part, untill both of them together with many other Riverets and Brookes running into them bee lod∣ged in Isis. This Isis when it hath passed a small part of Wil-shire, no sooner is entred into Oxford-shire but presently being kept in and restrained with Rodcot bridge, Rodcot Bridge, Bablac. passeth by Bablac, where Sir R. Vere that most puissant Earle of Oxford, Marquesse of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland, who as he stood in most high favour and authority with King Richard the Second, so he was as much envied of the Nobles, taught us (as one said) that no po∣wer is alwaies powerfull. Who being there discomfited in a skirmish by the No∣bles and constrained to take the River and swimme over, found the Catastrophe of his fortune and subversion of his state: For, immediately he fled his country and died di∣stressed in exile. Of whom the Poet in his Marriage of Tame and Isis, made these verses. —Hic Verus notissimus apro, Dum dare terga negat virtus, 1387. & tendere contrà Non sinit invictae rectrix prudentia mentis; Vndique dum resonat repetitis ictibus umbo, Tinnitúque strepit circum sua tempora cassis, Se dedit in fluvium, fluvius laetatus & illo Hospite, suscepit salvum, salvúmque remisit. Heere VERE, Wilde Bore the badge of the Veres. well knowne by badge of savage Bore, While man-hood shames to yeeld, yet strive againe Stout heart may not, restrain'd by wisdomes lore; Whiles shield resounds by doubled blowes amaine, And helmet rings about his eares; is faine The streame to take: The River glad therefore, His Guest tooke safe, and set him safe on shore. Isis from thence overflowing many times the flat and low grounds, is first encrea∣sed with the Brooke Windrush, which springing out of Cotteswold, hath standing up∣on the banke side Burford, Burford. in the Saxon Tongue , where Cuthred King of West-Saxons at that time by curtesie of the Mercians, when hee could endure no longer the most grievous exactions of Aethelbald the Mercian, who began to oppresse his people and sucke their bloud, came into the field against him, and put him to flight: having won his Banner, wherein, by report of Authours, there was a golden Dragon depainted. Barons Lovell. Then passeth it by Minster Lovell, the habitation in times past of the great Barons Lovels of Tichmerch, who being descended from Lovell. Lupellus a Noble man of Normandy flourished for many ages, and augmented their estate by rich mar∣riages with the daughters and heires of Tichmerch, with the heires of the Lords Hol∣land D'eyncourt, and the Vicounts Beaumont. But their line expired in Francis Vicount Lovell, Lord Chamberlaine to King Richard the Third, (attainted by King Henry the Seventh, and slaine in the battaile at Stoke in the quarrell of Lambert that Counterfeit Prince) whose sister Fridiswid was Grandmother to Henry the first Lord Norris. Hence Windrush hodling on his course watereth Whitney an ancient Towne, Whitney. and be∣fore the Normans daies belonging to the Bishops of Winchester: to which adjoyneth Coges, Arsic. the chiefe place of the Barony of Arsic, the Lords whereof branched out of the family of the Earles of Oxford are utterly extinguished many yeeres agoe. Neere unto this, the Forest of Witchwood beareth a great breadth and in time past spread farre wider. For King Richard the Third disforested the great Territory of Witchwood be∣tweene Woodstocke and Brightstow: which Edward the Fourth made to be a Forest, as Iohn Rosse of Warwicke witnesseth. Einsham. Isis having received Windrush passeth downe to Einsham in the Saxon tongue , a Manour in times past of the Kings, seated among most pleasant medowes, which Cuthwulfe the Saxon was the first that tooke from the Britans whom he had hereabout vanquished, and long after Aethelmar a Nobleman beautified it with an Abbay: the which, Aethelred King of England in the yeere of Salvation 1005. confirmed to the Benedictine Monkes, and in his confirmation signed the priviledge of the liberty thereof, (I speake out of the very originall grant as it was written) with the signe of the sacred Crosse: but now is turned into a private dwelling house and acknowledgeth the Earle of Derby Lord thereof. Beneath this, Evenlode a little river arising likewise out of Cotteswald speedeth him into Isis ; which riveret in the very border of the Shire passeth by an ancient Monument standing not farre from his banke, to wit, certaine huge stones placed in a round circle (the common people usually call them Rolle-rich∣stones, Rolle-rich-stones. and dreameth that they were sometimes men, by a wonderfull Metamorphosis turned into hard stones. The draught of them, such as it is, portrayed long since, heere I represent unto your view. For, without all forme and shape they bee, unequall, and by long continuance of time much impai∣red. The highest of them all, which without the circle looketh into the earth, they use to call The King, because hee should have beene King of England (forsooth) if hee had once seene Long Compton, a little Towne so called lying beneath, and which a man, if he goe some few paces forward, may see: other five standing at the other side, touching as it were, one another, they imagine to have been knights mounted on horse backe; and the rest the Army. But loe the foresaid Portraiture. These would I verily thinke to have beene the Monument of some Victory and haply, erected by Rollo the Dane, who afterwards conquered Normandie. For, what time as he with his Danes and Normans troubled England with depredations, we read that the Danes joined battaile with the English thereby, at Hoche Norton, and afterwards fought a second time at Scier stane in Huiccia, which also I would deeme to be that Mere-stone standing hard by for a land Marke, and parting foure shires: For, so much doth that Saxon word Scier-stane most plainly import. Certainly in an Exchequer booke the Towne adjacent is called Rollen-drich, where as it is there spe∣cified, Turstan le Dispenser held land by Serjeanty of the Kings Dispensary, that is, to be the Kings Steward. As for that Hoch-Norton, which I spake of before, for the ru∣sticall behaviour of the Inhabitants in the age afore going it grew to be a proverbe, when folke would say of one rudely demeaning himselfe and unmane ly after an Hog∣gish kinde, that hee was borne at Hocknorton. This place, for no one thing was more famous in old time, than for the woefull slaughter of the Englishmen in a foughten field against the Danes, under the Raigne of King Edward the Elder. Afterwards, it became the seat of the Barony of the D' Oilies an honourable and ancient Family of the Norman race; of whom the first that came into England was Robert de Oily, who for his good and valiant service, received of William Conquerour this Towne and ma∣ny faire possessions, whereof hee gave certaine to his sworne brother Roger Ivery, which were called the Barony of Saint Valeric. But when the said Robert departed this life without issue male, his brother Niele succeeded him therein: whose sonne Robert the second was founder of Osney Abbay. But at length the daughter and heire generall of this house D' Oily, was married to Henry Earle of Warwicke: and she bare unto him Thomas Earle of Warwicke, who dyed without issue in the Raigne of Henry the Third: and Margaret, who deceased likewise without children, abeit shee had two husbands, John Marescall, and John de Plessetis, both of them Earles of Warwicke. But then, (that I may speake in the very words of the Charter of the Grant) King Henry the Third granted Hoch-norton and Cudlington unto John de Plessetis, which were in times past the possessions of Henry D'Oily, and which after the decease of Margaret, wife sometime to the foresaid John Earle of Warwicke, fell into the kings hand as an Escheat of Nor∣mans lands: To have and to hold, untill the lands of England and Normandy were common. Howbeit out of this ancient and famous stocke there remaineth at this day a family of D' Oilies in this shire. Evenlode passeth by no memorable thing else, but La Bruer, now Bruern sometime an Abbay of white Monks, and after he hath runne a good long course taketh to him a Brooke, neere unto which standeth Woodstocke, in the English Saxon language , that is, A woody place, where King Etheldred in times past held an assembly of the States of the Kingdome and enacted Lawes. Heere is one of the Kings houses full of State and magnificence, built by King Henry the First, who adjoyned also thereunto a very large Parke compassed round about with a stone wall, which, John Rosse writeth to have beene the first Parke in England, although we read once or twise even in Doomesday Booke, these words, Parcus silvestris bestiarum in o∣ther places. In which sense old Varro useth the word Parcus, which some thinke to be but a new word. But since that, Parkes are growne to such a number that there bee more of them in England, than are to be found in all Christendome beside; so much were our Ancestours ravished with an extraordinary delight of hunting. Our Histo∣rians report, that King Henry the Second being enamoured upon Rosamund Clifford, a Damosell so faire, so comely, and well favoured without comparison, that her beauty did put all other women out of the Princes minde, in so much as now shee was termed Rosa mundi, that is, The Rose of the World ; and for to hide her out of the sight of his jealous Juno the Queene, he built a Labyrinth in this house, with many inexplicable windings, backward and forward: Which notwithstanding is no where to be seene at this day. The Towne it selfe, having nothing in it at all to shew, glorieth yet in this, Geffrey Chaucer▪ that Geffrey Chaucer our English Homer was there bred and brought up. Of whom and of our English Poets I may truely avouch that, which that learned Italian said of Homer and the Greeke Poets; —Hic ille est cujus de gurgite sacro Combibit arcanos vatum omnis turba furores. This is the man whose sacred streame hath served all the crew Of Poets, thence they dranke their fill, thence they their furies drew. For, he surpassing all others without question in wit, and leaving our smattering Poet-asters by many degrees behinde him: —jam monte potitus, Ridet anhelantem dura ad fastigia turbam. When once himselfe the steepe top hill had wonne, At all the sort of them he laught anone, To see how they the pitch thereof to gaine Puffing and blowing doe clamber up in vaine. Isis having now entertained Evenlode, divideth his Chanell and severing it selfe maketh many and those most delectable Islands, neere which stood Godstow a little Nunnery, which Dame Ida a rich widow built; and King John both repaired and also endowed with yearely Revenewes, that these holy Virgins might releeve with their prayer (for by this time had that persuasion possessed all mens mindes) the soules of King Henry the Second his father, and of Rosamund: For, there was she bu∣ryed with this Epitaph in Rhyme: Hac jacet in tumbâ Rosa mundi, non Rosamunda, Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet. Rose of the World, not Rose the fresh pure floure Within this Tombe hath taken up her boure: She senteth now and nothing sweet doth smell, Which earst was wont to savour passing well. * We read that Hugh the Bishop of Lincolne Diocesan of this place comming hi∣ther caused her bones to bee removed out of the Church as unworthy of Christian buriall for her unchaste life. Neverthelesse the holy sisters there translated them a∣gaine into the Church, and layed them up in a perfumed leather bagge; enclosed in lead as was found in her Tombe at the dissolution of the house; and they erected a Crosse there whereby the Passengers were put in minde with two rhyming Ver∣ses to serve God, and pray for her. But I remember them not. * Neither doth the Ouse or Isis as yet gather himselfe into one streame, when hee meeteth with Cherwell, which out of Northampton-shire, runneth almost through the mids of this Country. This River first watereth Banbury sometime , a faire large Towne, at which Kinric the West Saxon King in old time put to flight the Britans in a memorable battaile fighting manfully for their lives, state, and all they had: and in this later foregoing age, not farre off Richard Nevill Earle of War∣wicke siding with the house of Lancaster gave such an overthrow to those of Yorke, that forthwith also he tooke King Edward the Fourth now forlorne and hopelesse. Now the fame of this Towne is for zeale, cheese, and cakes, and hath a Castle for shew, which Alexander Bishop of Lincolne, (for to the See of Lincolne it belongeth) first built, who having a minde to dwell stately rather than quietly, brought upon himselfe many adversities by his huge buildings. About this Towne, (that I may observe so much by the way) peeces of the Romane Emperours Coine found, (as also elsewhere in the field neere adjoyning) make somewhat to prove the antiquity of the place. Neere to Banbury is Hanwell, where the Family of Cope hath flourished many yeares in great and good esteeme. And neere it againe is Broughton the habitation of Sir Richard Fienes, or Fenis: unto whom and to the heires of his body, the most mighty Prince King James, in the first yeare of his Raigne, Recognized and con∣firmed the name, stile, title, degree, dignity and honour of the Baron Say and Sele: as who lineally descended from Sir James Fienes Baron Say and Sele, and Lord high Treasu∣rer of England, who was cruelly beheaded by a rable of Rebells in the time of King Henry the Sixth. Cherwell carrying his Streame along from Banbury seeth nothing but pleasant fields passing well husbanded, and as plentifull medowes. Amongst which stand Heiford Warin, so denominated Warin Fitz-Gerold Lord thereof, Heyford Purcell likewise, so named of the Purcels, * or de Porcellis ancient Gentlemen the old owners, Blechindon an an ancient Possession of the ancient Family Le Pover, Islip. and Islip in elder time Ghistlipe the natall place of that King Edward (whom for his religious Piety and continency our Ancestours, and the Popes vouchsafed the name of Saint Edward the Confessor ) as hee himselfe witnesseth in the originall-Charter, whereby he granted this place to the Church of Westminster. Here there runneth a riveret from the East in to Cherwell, Burcester. which passeth by Bur∣cester, in the English Saxons tongue , and , a little towne carrying an ancient name, but wherein I have observed no matter of antiquity, save that Gilbert Basset and Egelina Courteney his Wife, built heere a Religious House in honour of Saint Eadburga, in the time of King Henry the Second, and that not long since the Barons Le Strange of Knocking were Lords of the place. But Westward, there lie some few remaines of a decayed and forlorne ancient station Alchester, Aldchester. they call it happily, as one would say, Aldchester, that is, an old Towne, by which a Port way from Wallengford, as the neighbour Inhabitants thinke, led to Banbury, and the same they called Akemanstreet way: the Tract whereof for cer∣taine miles together is yet most plainly to bee seene in the plaine of Otmore, Bath sometime called Ake∣mancester. Hedindon. which oftentimes is strangely overspread with winter waters. Cherwell thus increased passeth Southward nere to Hedindon, which King Iohn gave to Sir Thomas Basset for his Barony. * But where Cherwell is confluent with Isis, and pleasant Eights or Islets lye dis∣persed by the sundry disseverings of Waters; there the most Famous University of OXFORD, Oxford▪ called in the English Saxon tongue Oxenford, sheweth it selfe aloft in a Champion plaine. OXFORD, I say, our most noble Athens, The Muses-Seate, and one of Englands stayes ; nay The Sunne, the Eye, and the Soule thereof, the very Source and most cleare Spring of good Literature and Wisedome: From whence, Religi∣on, Civility and Learning are spred most plenteously into all parts of the Realme. A faire and goodly Citty, whether a man respect the seemely beauty of private houses or the stately magnificence of publike buildings, together with the whol∣some sight or pleasant prospect thereof. For, the hils beset with woods doe so envi∣ron the plaine, that as on the one side they exclude the pestilent Southwinde, and the tempestuous West winde on the other, so they let in the cleering Eastern-winde onely, and the North-east winde with all, which free from all corruption: Whence it came to passe that of this Situation it was, (as writers recorde in ancient times) called Bellositum. Some are of opinion, that it hath beene named Caer Vortigern and Caer Vember in the British language, and that I wote not, what Vortigerns and Mem∣prices built it. But what ever it was in the Britans time, the English Saxons called it , and altogether in the same signification that the Grecians terme their Bosphori, and the Germans their Ochen-furt upon Odera, to wit, of the fourd of Oxen: in which sense it is named of our Britans in Wales at this day Rhyd-ychen: And yet Leland grounding upon a probable conjecture, deriveth the name from the River Ouse called in Latine Isis, and supposeth that it hath beene named Ousford con∣sidering that the River Eights or Islands which Isis scattereth hereabout, bee cal∣led Ousney. Sage antiquity, as wee read in our Chronicles, consecrated this Citty even in the British age unto the Muses: whom from Greeke-lad (which is a small Towne at this day in Wilt-shire) they translated hither as unto a more fruitefull Plant-plot. For thus writeth Alexander Necham, Lib. 2. de Na∣tur erum. The skill of Civill Law Italy challengeth to it selfe: but for Heavenly Writ or Holy Scripture, the liberall Sciences also do prove, that the Citty of Paris is to bee preferred before all others. Moreover according to the Prophesie of Merline, Wisedome and Learning flourished at Oxford, which in due time was to passe over into the parts of Ireland. But when during the English Saxons age next ensuing, there was nothing but continuall wasting and rasing of Townes and Citties, according to the sway and current of those dayes it sustained in part the common calamity of that time, Frideswide. and for a great while was frequented onely for the reliques of Frideswide, who for the chastity and integrity of her life was canonized a Saint, upon this occa∣sion especially, for that by a solemne vow shee had wholly devoted her selfe unto the Service of GOD; and Prince Algar whiles he came a wooing unto her, was miraculously, as writers say, stricken blinde. This Frideswide, (as wee reade in Wil∣liam of Malmesbury ) triumphing for her virginity, erected here a Monastery, into which when certaine Danes adjudged to die in King Etheldreds time fled for refuge as to a Sanctu∣ary, they were all burned with the buildings, (such was the unsatiable anger of the Eng∣lishmen against them.) But soone after, when the King repented this Act, the Sanctuary, was cleansed, the Monastery reedified, the old Lands restored, new Possessions added, and at length the place was given by Roger Bishop of Salisbury unto a Chanon excellently well lear∣ned who there presented unto GOD many such Chanons who should live regularly in their Order. But leaving these matters, let us returne unto the University. When the tempestuous Danish stormes were meetely well blowne ouer, Aelfred that most devout and Godly King recalled the long banished Muses unto their owne Sacred Chancells and built three Colledges: one for Grammarians, a second for Philo∣sophers, and a third for Divines. But this you may more plainely understand out of these words in old Annales of the new Abbey of Winchester. In the yeare of Christs Incarnation * 806. and in the second yeare of Saint Grimbald his comming into England, was the Vniversity of OXFORD begunne. The first Regents in the same and Readers in the Divinity Schoole were Saint Neoth an Abbat, and besides a worthy Teacher in Divinity; and holy Grimbald a right excellent Professour of the most sweete written Word of Holy Scripture. But in Grammar and Rhetoricke, the Regent was Asserius a Monke, in the skill of Literature passing well learned. In Logicke, Musicke and Arithmeticke, the Reader was John a Monke of the Church of Menevensis. Saint Davids: In Geometry and Astro∣nomy reade John a Monke also and Companion of Saint Grimbald, a Man of a passing quicke witte, and right learned every way: At which Lectures was present that most glo∣rious and invincible King Aelfred, whose memoriall in every Mans mouth shall bee as sweete as honie. But presently after, as wee reade in a very good manuscript coppy of the sayd Asserius, who at the same time professed learning here; There arose a most dangerous and pernicious dissention at Oxford, betweene Grimbald and these great Clerkes whom hee brought thither with him on the one side, and those old Schoole-men whom hee there found, on the other side: who upon his comming refused altogether to embrace the Rules, Orders and Formes of reading prescribed and begunne by him. For three yeares space the variance and discord betweene them was not great, howbeit there lurked a secret hatred fostered and feste∣red among them, which brake out afterwards in most grievous and bitter manner, and was most evident. For the appeasing whereof, that most Invincible King Aelfred being by a mes∣sage and complaint from Grimbald certified of that discord, went to OXFORD to de∣termine and end this controversie: Where also himselfe in Person tooke exceeding great paines in giving Audience to the quarrels and complaints of both sides. Now the maine sub∣stance of all the contention stood upon this point. Those old Schoole-men hotly avouched, that before Grimbalds comming to OXFORD Learning generally flourished there, although the Schollers and Students were fewer then in number than in former times, by reason that the most of them through the cruelty and tyranny of Painims were expelled. Moreover they proved and declared, and that by the undoubted testimony of old Chronicles, that the Orders and Ordinances of that place were made and established by certaine Godly and learned men, as namely Gildas of holy memory, Melkin, Ninnius, Kentigern and others, who all of them studied and followed their books there untill they were aged persons, managing and governing all things there in happy peace and concord: also that S. German came to Oxford and abode there halfe a yeare, what time as he travelled through Britan, with a purpose to preach against the Pelagian heresies, who wonderous well allowed of their former Orders and Ordinances. This Noble King with incredible and unexampled humility heard both parts most diligently, exhorting them in earnest wise, (enterlacing godly and wholsome admonitions) to keepe mu∣tuall society and concord one with another. And so the King departed with this minde, hoping they would all of both sides obey his counsell and embrace his orders. But Grymbald taking this unkindely and to the heart, forthwith went his wayes to Winchester Abbay newly founded by Aelfred: Shortly after hee caused his owne Tombe to be translated to Winchester, wherein he purposed after hee had runne his race in this life, that his bones should bee bestowed, in an arched Vault made under the Chancell of Saint Peters Church in Oxford: Which Church verily the same Grymbald had built from the very foundation out of the ground, with stone most curiously wrought and polished. Within some years after this new revived felicity, there ensued divers disturban∣ces from the Danes, and afterward followed one or two calamities. For the Danes in the reigne of Etheldred by way of robbery and foule worke and havocke there: and streight after, Herald surnamed Light foote raged against it with such barbarous cruelty, for that some of his followers were slaine there in a fray, that there followed thereupon a most heavy banishment of the Students, and the University, (a sorrow∣full spectacle) lay as it were, halfe dead and past all recovery, untill the dayes of king William the Conquerour. Whom some write falsly to have wonne it by assault: but Oxonia written amisse in the Copies, for Exonia, that is, Excester deceived them. And that it was at that time a place of Studies and Students, may bee understood out of these words of Ingulph, who in that age flourished. I, Ingulph (saith hee) being first placed in Westminster, and afterwards sent to the Studia, Schooles of Universitie. Study of Oxford, when as in learning of Aristotle, I had profited above my fellowes of the same time, &c. For those Schooles of Learning which wee call Academies or Vniversities, that Age termed Studia, that is, Studies, as I will shew anone. But at this very time, it was so empoverished, that whereas within the wall and without, (I speake out of William the Conque∣rour his Domesday booke ) there were about seaven hundred and fifty houses, besides foure and twenty Mansions upon the Walls, five hundred of them were not able to pay their Subsidy or Imposition. And to use the very words of that booke, This Cit∣ty paid pro Toll and Tribute. Theloneo et Gablo, and for other Customes by the yeare to the King twenty pounds and sixe quarts of Hony: and unto Earle Algar tenne pounds. About this time, Robert D'oily a noble man of Normandy (of whom I have before spoken) when hee had received at the hands of William the Conquerour in reward of his Service in the Warres, large Possessions in this Shire, built a spacious Castle in the West side of the Citty with deepe Ditches, Rampiers, an high raised Mount, and therein a Parish Church to Saint George, unto which when as the Parishioners could not have accesse, by reason that King Stephen most streightly besieged Maude the Em∣presse within this Castle; 1074. Saint Thomas Chappell in the streete hard by was built. He also, Register of Osney Abbay as it is thought, fortified the whole Citty with new walls, which by little and little time doth force, and as it were embreach with his assault. Robert likewise Nephew unto him by his brother Neale, and Chamberlaine to King Henry the First, founded Ousney or Osney, Osney. a most stately Abbay, as the ruines doe yet shew, amidst the divided waters, 1129. not farre from the Castle: perswaded thereto by Edith his wife, (the daughter of Forne ) who before time had beene one of King Henry the First his sweet hearts and lig-bies. About those times as we read in the Chronicle of the said Osney Abbay, Robert Pulein beganne to reade in Oxford the Holy Scriptures, in England now growne out of re∣quest: Who afterwards, when as by his Doctrine the English and Frenchmen both had much profited; was called by Pope Lucius the second, and promoted to be Chancellour of the Church of Rome. To the same effect also writeth Iohn Rosse of Warwicke. By the procurement of King Henry the First, the Divinity Lecture which had discontinued a long time in Oxford, began againe to flourish, and there he built a Palace, which King Edward the Second at length converted into a Covent of Carmelits. But long before this time, in this Palace was borne into the World that Lion-hearted Knight, Richard Cu de Lion. Richard the First King of England; com∣monly called Ceeur de Lion, a Prince of a most hauty minde and full of resolution, borne for the weale of Christendome, the honour of England, and the terrour of Infidels. Upon whose death a Poet in that age of no meane conceite versified thus, for that his remaines were interred in diverse places; Viscera Carcelorum, Corpus Fons servat Ebrardi, Et cor Rhothomagum, Magne Richarde, tuum: In tria dividitur unus, qui, plus fuit uno, Nec superest uno gloria tanta viro. Hîc Richarde jaces, sed mors si cederet armis, Victa timore tui, cederet ipsa tuis. Thy Bowels keep's Carceolum, thy corps Font Everard: And Roan thy valiant Lions heart, O noble great Richard. Thus one three fold divided is, for more he was then one, And for that one, so great he was, such glory is in none. Here li'st thou Richard, but if death to force of armes could yeeld, For feare of thee he would to thee have given as lost the field. Thus after the Citty was refreshed againe with these buildings, many beganne to flocke hither as it were to a Mart of learning and vertue: and by the industrious meanes especially of that Robert Pulein, a man borne to promote the Common-wealth of lear∣ning, who refused no paines, but laboured all that he could to set open againe those Well springs of good Literature which had beene stopped up, through the favour especially of King Henry the First, King Henry the Second, and King Richard his sonne, of whom I spake ere while. And these endeavours of Pulein sped so well and tooke so good effect, that in the reigne of King Iohn, there were here three thousand Students; who all at once every one changed their Habitation to Reding and partly to Cambridge, because the Citizens seemed to wrong and abuse overmuch these Students and Professours of Learning: but after this tumult was appeased, they re∣turned within a short time. Then and in the age presently ensuing, as God provi∣ded this City for good learning, so he raised up a number of very good Princes and Prelats to the good thereof, who for the adorning and maintenance of learning exten∣ded their liberality in the highest degree. For, when King Henry the Third had by way of Pilgrimage visited Saint Frideswide, (a thing before-time thought to bee an hainous Offence in a Prince for the dishonour offered to her by Algar a Prince) and so removed that superstitious feare, wherewith some superstitious Priestes had for a time frighted Princes from once comming to Oxford: and had assembled here a very great Parliament for the composing of certaine controversies betweene him and the Barons, hee confirmed the priviledges granted by the former Kings, and conferred also some other himselfe. So that by this time there was so great store of learned men, that divers most skilfull in Divinity as well as in Humanitie, were in great numbers spread from thence both into the Church and Common-wealth: and Mathew Paris, in plaine termes called The Vniversity of Oxford, The Second Schoole of the Church, nay, rather a ground worke of the Church, next after Paris. For with the name of Vniversity the Bishops of Rome had before time honoured Oxford, which Title at that time by their Decrees they vouchsafed to none but unto that of Paris, this of Oxford, unto Bononia in Italy and Salamanca in Spaine. And in the Councell of Vienna, it was ordained that there should bee erected Schooles for the Hebrew, Greeke, Arabicke and Chaldaean tongues, in the Studies of Paris, Oxford, Bononie and Clementinarum Quinto. Salamanca, as the most famous of all others, to the end that the knowledge of those tongues might by effectuall instruction be throughly learned. And, that Catholicke men having sufficient knowledge in those tongues should bee chosen, twaine skilfull in every of those tongues. For those who were to bee Professours in Oxford, The same Councell or∣dained, That the Prelats of England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales, the Monasteries also, the Chapters, the Covents, the Colledges exempt, and not exempt, and Persons of Churches should provide competent stipends. Out of these words may bee observed, both that Oxford was the chiefe place of Studies in England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales, and also that those Schooles which we now adayes doe call Academies and Universities, were aptly in old time named Studies: as S. Hierom tearmed the Schooles of Gaul, Studia Florentissima, that is, Studia. Ad Rusticum Mon hum. most flourishing Studies. And as for the name of Vniversity, it was taken up about the time of King Henry the Third, for a Publike Schoole, and if I bee not deceived in mine owne observations, it was then in use not for the place but for the very body and society of Students, Vniversitas. as we reade in bookes of that age, Vniversitas Magistrorum Oxoniae, Vniversitas Magistrorum Cantabrigiae, that is, The Vniversity of Masters of Ox∣ford, &c. But happily this may seeme beside my Text. Now by this time, good and bountifull Patrons began to furnish the Citty with∣in, and the Suburbs without with most stately Colledges, Halls and Schools, and to endow them also with large Revenewes: For the greatest part of the Vniversity was beforetime in the Suburbs without the North-gate. Colledges. In the reigne of King Hen∣ry the third, Iohn Balliol of Barnards Castle in the Bishopricke of Durham who died in the yeere 1269. the father of Balliol King of Scots, The booke of Mailros. The first in∣dowed Col∣ledge for Scho∣lers. founded Balliol Colledge and so named it: and streight after Walter Merton Bishop of Rochester, translated the Col∣ledge which hee had built in Surrey to Oxford, in the yeere 1274. enriched it with Lands and Possessions, naming it The house of Schollers of Merton, but now it is cal∣led Merton Colledge. And these two were the first endowed Colledges for Students in Christendome. William Archdeacon of Durham repaired and enlarged with new building that worke of King Aelfred, which now they call, Vniversity Colledge. At which time, the Students; for that they entertained somewhat coursely Otto the Popes Legate, or Horse-leach rather, sent out to sucke the English Clergies blood, were excommunicate and with all indignities shamefully handled. And in those dayes, as Armachanus writeth, there were counted here thirty thousand Students. Under King Edward the Second, Walter Stapledon Bishop of Exceter founded Exceter Colledge and Hart Hall, 1318. Register of Hide-Abby. and the King himselfe in imitation of him built the Colledge commonly called Oriall, and S. Mary Hall. At which time a convert Jew read an Hebrew Lecture here, unto whom for a Stipend every one of the Clergy of Oxford for every Marke of his Ecclesiasticall living, contributed a penny. Afterward Queene Philip wife to King Edward the Third, built Queenes Colledge, and Simon Islip, Archbishop of Canterbury, Canterbury Colledge. The Students then, having the world at will and all things falling out to their hearts desire, became insolent, and being divided into factions, under the names of Northren and Southren men, strucke up the Alarum to intestine and unreasonable tumults among themselves. Whereupon the Northren faction went their wayes to Stanford and beganne there to set up Schooles. But some few yeeres after, when Gods favour shining more lightsomely had scattered away the clouds of contention, they returned from Stanford recalled by Proclamation directed to the High-sheriffe of Lincolneshire upon penalty to forfeit their bookes and the Kings displeasure. And then it was ordained that no Oxford man should professe at Stanford, to any prejudice or hinderance of Oxford. Shortly after William Wickham Bishop of Winchester foun∣ded a magnificent Colledge, which they call New-Colledge: into which out of ano∣ther Colledge of his at Winchester the best wits are yeerely transplanted. And hee about the same by the tract of the Citty wall built a faire high wall embatled and tur∣rited. Also Richard Angervill Bishop of Durham, surnamed Philobiblos, that is Love booke, furnished a Library for the publike use of Students. His Successour Thomas Hatfield, laied the foundation of Durham Colledge, for Durham Monkes, and Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincolne founded likewise Lincolne Colledge. Also at the same time the Monkes of the order of Saint Bennet, by a Chapter held among them, laid their monies together and encreased Glocester Hall : built before by I. Lord Gifford of Brimsfield for Monkes of Glocester, wherein one or two Monkes out of every Covent of Benedictine Monkes were maintained at study, who afterwards should professe good letters in their Abbaies, unto which Glocester Hall, Nicholas Wadham of Merifeld in the County of Somerset, hath assigned a faire portion of lands and mony for the propagation of Religion and Learning, which I note incidently by way of con∣gratulation to our Age, that there are yet some who graciously respect the ad∣vancement of good Learning. About that time, not to speake of the Chanons of Saint Frideswide, Hide Abbay. Locus Regalus. and Osney, or the Cistertian Monkes of Reilew, there were erected fower faire Frieries and other religious houses, where flourished also many profound Learned men. In the age ensuing, when Henry the Fifth reigned, Henry Chicheley Archbishop of Canterbury built two and those very faire Colledges, the one dedi∣cated to the memory of All Soules, and the other to Saint Bernard. And there passed not many yeeres betweene, when William Wainflet Bishop of Winchester founded Mary Magdalen Colledge: for building rare and excellent, for sight commodious, and for walkes passing pleasant. And at the very same time was built the Divinity Schoole, so fine a peece of elegant worke that this of Xeuxis may justly bee ingraven upon it: Invisurum facilius aliquem quàm imitaturum: that is, Sooner will one envy mee, then set such another by me. And Humfrey that good Duke of Glocester, a singular Patron, and a respective lover of learning, encreased the Library over it with an hun∣dred twenty nine most select Manuscript bookes, which at his great charges he pro∣cured out of Italy. But such was the private avarice of some in the giddy time of K. Edward the Sixt, Sir Thomas Bodley. that they for small gaine envied the use thereof to Posterity. Yet now againe (God blesse and prosper it) Sir Thomas Bodley a right worshipfull knight and a most worthy Nource-son of this Vniversity furnished richly in the same place a new Library with the best books of exquisite choice from all parts, with great char∣ges and studious care, never sufficiently commended. Whereby the Vniversity may once againe have a publike Store-house of knowledge and learning, and himselfe deserveth the Glory that may flourish freshly in the memory of all Eternity. And whereas by an ancient custome of the wisest men, those were wont to be dedicated within such Libraries in gold, silver or brasse, by whose care they were erected; and whose immortall soules in them doe speake: to the end that Time might not have po∣wer and prevaile against men of worth, and the desires of mortall men might be sa∣tisfied who do all long to know what their persons and presence were. The Earle of Dorset late Chancellor of this Vniversity (that he might also leave some memoriall of himselfe) hath in the very place dedicated unto Sir Thomas Bodley so passing well de∣serving of the Learned Common-wealth, his representation with this inscription: THOMAS SACKUILLUS DORSETTIAE CO∣MES, SUMMUS ANGLIAE THESAURARI∣US, ET HUJUS ACADEMIAE CANCEL∣LARIUS, THOMAE BODLEIO EQUITI AURA∣TO, QUI BIBLIO THE CAM HANC INSTITUIT, HONORIS CAUSSA PIE POSUIT. That is, THOMAS SACKUIL EARLE OF DORSET, LORD HIGH TREASURER OF ENGLAND, AND CHANCELOR OF THIS UNIVERSITIE, UNTO SIR THOMAS BODLEY KNIGHT, WHO INSTITUTED THIS LIBRARY OF A PIOUS MIND ERECTED THIS MO∣NUMENT TO DO HIM HONOUR. In the Raigne of Henry the Seventh, for the better advancement of learning, William Smith Bishop of Lincolne built new out of the ground Brasen Nose College, (which that good and godly old man Master Alexander Nowell Deane of Saint Paules in London lately augmented with Revenewes) and Richard Fox Bishop of Winche∣ster erected likewise that which is named Corpus Christi College: and Thomas Wolsey Cardinall of Yorke following their example, beganne another (where the Monaste∣ry of Frideswide stood ) the most stately and fairest of them all, for Professors and 200. Students, which Henry the Eighth, joyning unto it Canterbury College assigned to a Deane Prebends and Students, endowed it with livings, and named it Christs Church. And the same most puissant Prince, with money disbursed out of his owne Treasury, ordained, both for the Dignity of the City a Bishop, and for the ornament and ad∣vancement of the University, publique Professours. Likewise within our remem∣brance, for the furtherance of learning with new and fresh benefits, Sir Thomas Pope Knight reared a new Durrham College: and Sir Thomas White Knight Citizen and Alderman of London raised Bernard College, both which lay buryed in the rub∣bish. They reedified them, repaired them with new buildings, enriched them with faire lands and gave them new names: For the one of them they dedicated to Saint Iohn Baptist, and that other to the holy and sacred Trinity. Queene Mary also built the common Schooles. And now of late Hugh Prise Doctor of the Lawes, hath be∣gunne a new College (with good speede and happy successe as I wish) to the honor of Iesus. With these Colleges which are in number 16. (and eight Haulls beside) all faire, and decently built, richly endowed and furnished with good Libraries, Oxford at this day so flourisheth, that it farre surmounteth all other Universities of Christen∣dome. And for Living Libraries, (for so may I well and truely with Eunapius terme great Scholers and learned men) for the discipline and teaching of the best Arts, and for the politique government of this their republicke of Literature, it may give place to none. But to what end is all this? Oxford needeth no mans commendation: the excellency thereof doth so much exceede, and (if I may use Plinies word) super∣fluit, that is, Surmounteth. Let this suffice to say of Oxford as Pomponius Mela did of Athens, Clarior est quàm ut indicari egeat, that is, More glorious it is of it selfe, than that it needeth to bee out shewed. But have heere for an upshot and farewell, the begin∣ning of Oxford story out of the Proctors booke. By the joint testimony of most Chroni∣cles, many places in divers Coasts and Climats of the world we read to have flourished at sundry times in the studies of divers sciences; But the Vniversity of Oxford is found to be for foun∣dation more ancient; for plurality of sciences more generall, in profession of the Catholike truth more constant, and in multiplicity of Privileges more excellent, than all other Schooles that are knowne among the Latines. The Mathematicians of this University have observed, that this their City is from the Fortunate Islands 22. Degrees, and the Arcticke or North Pole elevated 51. Degrees, and 50. Scruples high. And thus much briefly of my deare Nurse-mother Oxford. But when a little beneath Oxford Isis and Cherwell have consociated their waters together within one Chanell, Isis then entire of himselfe and with a swifter current runneth Southward, to finde Tame whom so long he had sought for. And gone he is not forward many miles, but behold Tame streaming out of Buckinghamshire, mee∣teth with him: who is no sooner entred into this Shire, but he giveth name to Tame a Mercate Towne situate very pleasantly among Rivers. For, Tame passeth hard by the Northside, and two Riverers shedding themselves into it compasse the same, the one on the East, and the other on the West. Alexander that liberall Bishop of Lin∣colne, Lord of the place, when his prodigall humor in sumptuous building of Castles was of every body privily misliked, to wash out that staine (as Newbrigensis saith) built a little Abbay neere unto the Towne: and many yeares after the Quatremans, who in the age foregoing were men of great reputation in these parts, founded an Hospitall for the sustentation of poore people. But both of these are now decayed and quite gone: Baron Wil∣liams of Ta and in stead thereof Sir Iohn Williams Knight, whom Queene Ma∣ry advanced to the Dignity of a Baron, by the Title of Lord William of Tame erected a very faire Schoole, Baron William of Tame. and a small Hospitall. But this Title soone determined when he left but daughters marryed into the Families of Norris and Wenman. From hence Tame runneth downe neere unto Ricot, a goodly house, which in times past belonged to those Quatremans: whose stocke failing to bring forth Males, it was devolved at length after many sailes and alienations passed by the Foulers and Herons, unto the said Lord Williams ; and so by his daughter fell to Sir Henry, Lord Norris, whom Queene Elizabeth made Baron Norris of Ricot, a man of good marke in regard of his noble birth and parentage: for he descended from the Lovells, who were neere allied by kinred unto the greatest houses in England: but most renowned for that right valiant and warlike Progeny of his, as the Netherlands, Portugall, little Bretagne, and Ireland can witnesse. At the length, Tame by Haseley, where some∣times the names of Barentines flourished as at Cholgrave commeth to Dorchester by Bede termed Civitas Dorcinia: by Leland Hydropolis, a name devised by his owne con∣ceit, yet fit enough, Dorchester. considering that Dour in the British tongue signifieth water. That this Towne was in old time inhabited by Romanes, their coined peeces of mo∣ney oftentimes turned up doe imply: and our Chronicles record, that it was for a long time much frequented by reason of a Bishops See, which Birinus the Apostle of the West-Saxons appointed to be there. For when hee had baptised Cinigilse a pety King of the West-Saxons, unto whom Oswald King of Northumberland was God∣father, both these Kings, as saith Bede, gave this City unto the same Bishop to make therein his Episcopall residency. This Birinus, as wee may read also in Bede, was wonderfully in those daies admired, for a deepe conceived opinion of his holinesse: whereupon an ancient Poet who penned his life in Verse, wrote thus of him, Dignior attolli guàm sit Tyrinthius heros, Quàm sit Alexander Macedo; Tyrinthius hostes Vicit, Alexander mundum, Birinus utrunque. Nec tantùm vicit mundum, Birinus, & hostem, Sed sese bello vincens, & victus eodem. More worthy for to be extold than Hercules for might, Or that great king of Macedon, who Alexander hight: For Hercules subdu'd his foes; and Alexander he Wonne all the World by force of Armes: But our Birinus, see, Did vanquish both: nor conquer'd he onely the World and Foe, But in one fight subdu'd himselfe, and was subdu'd also. After 460. yeares, Remigus Bishop of this place least the name of Bishop should loose credit in so small a City (a thing forbidden in the Canons) in the Raigne of Wil∣liam the first translated his seat to Lincolne. At which time this City of Dorchester (as Malmesbury saith who then flourished) was but slender and of small resort, yet the majesty of the Churches was great, whether you respected either the old building, or the new diligence and care emploied thereupon. Ever since it beganne by little and little to decay: and of late by turning London high way from thence, it hath de∣creased so, as that of a City it is scarce able now to maintaine the name of a Towne, and all that it is able to doe, is to shew in the fields adjoyning ruines onely and rub∣bish, as expresse tokens of what bignesse it hath beene. A little beneath this Towne Tame and Isis meeting in one streame become hand-fast (as it were) and joyned in Wedlocke: Tame and Isis meet. and as in waters, so in name, they are coupled, as Ior and Dan in the ho∣ly Land, Dor and Dan in France, whence come Iordan and Dordan. For ever after this, the River by a compound word is called, Tamisis, that is, Tamis. He seemeth first to have observed this, who wrote the booke entituled Eulogium Historiarum. Now as touching this marriage of Isis with Tame have heere certaine Verses taken out of a Poem bearing that Title, which you may read or leave unread at your pleasure: Hic vestit Zephyrus florentes gramine ripas, FLORAQYE nectareis redimit caput ISIDIS herbis, Seligit ambrosios pulcherrima GRATIA flores, Contexit geminas CONCORDIA laeta corollas, Extollitque suas taedas Hymenaeus in altum. Naiades aedificant thalamúm{que} thorúm{que} profundo, Stamine gemmato textum, pictisque columnis Vndique fulgentem. Qualem nec Lydia Regi Extruxit Pelopi, nec tu Cleopatra marito. Illic manubias cumulant, quas Brutus Achivis, Quas Brennus Graecis, rigidus Gurmundus Hibernis, Bunduica Romanis, claris Arthurius Anglis Eripuit, quicquid Scotis victricibus armis Abstulit Edwardus, virtús{que} Britannica Gallis. Hauserat intereà sperati conjugis ignes TAMA Catechlaunûm delabens montibus, illa Impatiens nescire thorum, nupturaque gressus Accelerat, longique dies sibi stare videntur, Ambitiosa suum donec praeponere nomen Possit amatori. Quid non mortalia cogit Ambitio? notamque suo jam nomine Tame. villam Linquit, Norrisiis geminans salvete, valete. Cernitur & tandem Dorcestria prisca petiti Augurium latura thori, nunc TAMA resurgit Nexa comam spicis, trabea succincta virenti, Aurorae superans digitos, vultumque Diones, Pestanae non labra rosae, non lumina gemmae, Lilia non aequant crines, non colla pruinae, Vtque fluit, crines madidos in terga repellit, Reddit & undanti legem formamque capillo, En subitò frontem placidis è fluctibus ISIS Effert, & totis radios spargentia campis Aurea stillanti resplendent lumina vultu, Iungit & optatae nunc oscula plurima TAMAE, Mutuáque explicitis innectunt colla lacertis, Oscula mille sonant, connexu brachia pallent, Labra ligant animos: tandem descenditur unà In thalamum, quo juncta FIDE CONCORDIA sancta, Splendida conceptis sancit connubia verbis. Vndíque multifori strepitat nunc tibia buxi, Flucticolae Nymphae, Dryades, Satyríque petulci In numeros circùm ludunt, ducuntque choreas, Dum pede concutiunt alterno gramina laeti, Permulcent volucres sylvas modulamine passim, Certatímque sonat laetùm reparabilis ECHO. Omnia nunc rident, campi laetantur, AMORES Fraenatis plaudunt avibus per inania vecti: Personat & cythara quicquid vidêre priores, Pronuba victura lauro velata BRITÔNA. Haec canit ut toto diducta BRITANNIA mundo, Cùm victor rupes divulserit aequore Nereus, Et cur Neptuni lapidosa grandine natum Albionem vicit nostras delatus in oras Hercules illimes libatus Thamisis undas, Quas huc adveniens ar as sacravit Vlysses, Vtque Corinaeo Brutus comitatus Achate Occiduos adiit tractus, ut Caesar anhelus Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis, &c. And after a few other verses: Dixerat, unito consurgit & unus amore Laetior exultans nunc nomine TAMISIS uno, Oceanúmque patrem quaerens jactantior undas Promovet. Heere Zephyrus with fresh greene grasse The Bankes above doth spread, Flora. Faire Flora with ay-living herbs Adourneth ISIS head, Most lovely GRACE selecteth forth Sweet floures that never dy And gladsome CONCORD plats thereof Two guitlands skilfully. With all God HYMENAEUS lifts His torches up on hie. A Bride-chamber the NAIADES Beneath of rare device And Bed do rear, ywov'n with warp Beset with stones of price. All shining eke with pillars tall, And wrought full curiously The like did ne her Lydie for King Pelops edify, Nor thou, Queene Cleopatra, for Thine husband Antony. There lay they foorth and make no spare, Those spoiles that whilom Brut From Achives tooke; what riches great From Grecians Brennus stout, And from fierce Irish, Gurmund wonn, What either Bundwic Queen, From Romans gat, or Arthur from Our English there are seene. What ever from the Scots by force Of fight our Edward King, Or valiant English from the French By armes away did bring. Meane while, down Catechlanian hils TAME gliding, kindled had The fire of love in hope of ISE Her husband wondrous glad. Impatient now of all delay She hastneth him to wed, And thinks the daies be long untill They meet in marriage bed. Untill I say, ambitious she, May now before her love Her own name set: see whereunto Ambition minds doth move! And now by this shee leav's the Tame. town That knowen is by her name, All haile, fare well redoubling to The Norris's by the same. Old Dorchester at length shee sees Which was to give presage, And lucky Augury of this Long wished marriage. Up riseth Tame then, who know's Her locks with eares of corn Full well to knit, with kirtle green Her wast eke to adorn: The lightsome raies of morning bright She now doth far excell, Dione faire in countenance Lookes not by halfe so well. Her lips the Pestane Rose surpasse, Her eyes, gemmes of great cost, Her haire the Lilies fresh and white, Her necke the hoary frost. And as she runnes, her haire all wet She doth behind her cast, Which waving thus she kembeth slick, And layeth even at last. Lo, Isis sudainly out of The Waves so mild doth shew, His lovely face, his eies withall Glitter with golden hew, As they from dropping visage send Their beames the fields throughout, Whiles one anothers neck with armes Displayd they clip about, Full sweetly he doth Tama kisse Whom he hath wish'd so long, A thousand kisses twixt them twain Doe now resound among. With clasping close their armes wax pale, Their lips their hearts linke fast, To nuptiall chamber thus they both Jointly descend at last: Where CONCORD with religious FAITH Together both ymet, Knit up the knot of wedlock sure With words in forme yset. And now the pipes of thyrled box On every side resound; The water Nymphes, the Dryades The wanton Satyrs round About the place disport and dance The measures cunningly, Whiles on the grasse they foote it fine, In rounds as merily. The Birds heerewith in every wood Melodiously doe sing, And ECHO her redoubled notes In mirth strives forth to ring. All things now laugh, the fields rejoice The CVPIDS as they fly, Amid the aire on bridled birds Clap hands right pleasantly BRITONA, hand-fast-maker shee, All clad in Laurell green, Play's on the Harp what ever acts Our auncestours have seene. Shee sings how BRITANNY from all The world divided was, When Nereus with victorious Sea Through cloven rocks did passe: And why it was that Hercules When he arrived heere, Upon our coast, and tasted once The mudlesse TAMIS cleere, Did Neptun's sonne high Albion Vanquish in bloudy fight And with an haile-like storme of stones Kild him in field out-right. And when Vlysses hither came, What Altars sacred were By him? How Brute with Corinae His trusty friend and fere, Went foorth into the Western parts And how that Caesar, he When he had sought and found, turn'd back With feare, from Britannie. And after some few verses interposed. This said, then Tame and Isis both In love and name both one, Hight Tamisis, more joy's therein, And hastning to be gone Ariseth up and leaping out, With hastfull hot desire, Advanceth forth his streame, and seekes The Ocean main his sire. Benson. From Dorchester, Tamis goeth to Benson, in old time Bensingston, which Marian calleth Villam Regiam, that is, The Kings towne, and reporteth, That Ceaulin tooke it from the Britans in the yeere of our Lord, 572. and that the West-Saxons kept the possession of it 200. yeeres after. For, then Offa the King of Mercians, thin∣king it would be for his commoditie and honor both, that they should have nothing on this side the river, wonne it, and subjected it to him. But at this day it goeth for a village onely, and hath a house of the Kings hard by, sometime a faire place, but now running exceedingly to ruine, as being not very wholsome by reason of the foggy aire and mists arising from a standing water adjoyning. This house of certaine Elmes called Ewelme, Ewelme. but commonly New-Elme, was built by William de la pole Duke of Suffolke, who having taken to Wife Alice the onely daughter of Thomas Chaucer, had by her faire lands heereabout as elsewhere: and beside this house, he erected also a faire Church, wherein the said Alice lieth buried, and a proper Hospitall: But Iohn Earle of Lincolne his Grand child, who by King Richard the Third had beene declared heire apparent to the Crowne, overthrew in some sort the happie estate of this Family. For whiles he plotted and projected seditiously to rebell against King Henry the seventh, he was attainted and slaine in the battell at Stoke, and Edmund his brother being for like cause attainted, the possessions became C owne-land. Then King Henrie the Eighth made this house an Honour, by laying unto it certaine Ma∣nours, and Wallingford among others, which before had a long time belonged unto the Dukes of Cornewall. The Tamis from hence having fetched a great compasse about windeth in manner backe againe into himselfe, enclosing within it the Hundred of Henley, mounting high with Hills, and beset with thicke Woods, which some doe thinke the AN∣CALITES that yeelded themselves unto Caesars protection, Ancalites. did inhabite. Here is ix-br nd and Stonor ancient Possessions of the Families of Stonores * who since the time of King Edward the Third when Sir Iohn Stonore was chiefe Justice in the Common-pleas, Stonor. flourished with great alliance, and faire revenues untill they were transferred by an Heire generall to Sir Adrian Fortescue unhappily attainted, whose daughter, Heire to her mother was married to the first Baron Wen worth. Next neighbour hereunto is Pus-hull which the Family of D'oily held by yeelding yeerely to the King a Table-cloth of three shillings price, Pus-hull Naper. Fin Mich. 10. R. 2. Grey of Ro∣therfield. or three shillings for all service. Under this Southward standeth Greies Rotherfield, a house which in times past Walter Grey the Archbishop of Yorke gave freely unto William Grey his Nephew, the Inhe∣ritance whereof by the Baron of D'Eincourt was devolved upon the Lovels. Now it is the dwelling house of Sir William Knolles, Treasurer of the Kings House, whom Iames our King for his faithfull service performed unto Queene Elizabeth, and to be performed unto himselfe, Baron Knolles. Henley. advanced to the honourable title of Baron Knolles of Ro∣therfield. Nere unto it, Henley upon Tamis, in old time called Hanleganz sheweth it selfe in the very confines of the shires. The Inhabitants whereof be for the most part Watermen, who make their chiefest gaine by carrying downe in their Barges wood and Corne to London: neither can it make report of any greater antiquity than that in times past the Molinies were Lords thereof, from whom by the Hungerfords who procured unto the towne, of King Henry the Sixth the liberty of holding two faires, it came by right of Inheritance unto the honourable house of the Hastings. Xiphilinus. And where now the Tamis hath a wooden Bridge over it, they say in times past there stood one of stone arched. But whether this Bridge were here, that Dio writeth the Romans passed over when they pursued the Britans along this tract, who below had swom over the river, hard it is for a man to say. From Henley, the Chiltern-bils hold on with a continued ridge running Northward, and divide this Country from Buck∣inghamshire: at the foote whereof stand many small townes: among which these two are of greatest note, Watlington a little mercate towne belonging sometime to Robert D' Oily: Shirburne. and Shirburne a prety Castle of the Quatremans in times past, but now the habitation of the Chamberlans descended out of the house of the Earles of Tankervill, who having beene long agoe Chamberlains of Normandy, their Poste∣rity relinquishing that old name of Tankervills, became surnamed Chamberlans, of the Office which their ancestours bare. To omit Edgar, Earles of Oxford. Algar, and other English Saxons, officiall Earles of Oxford; Since after the Conquest, the title of the Earledome of Oxford hath flourished a long time in the Family of Vere, which derive their descent from the Earles of Guines, and that surname from Vere a towne in Zeland. They received the beginning of their greatnesse and honour here in England from King Henry the First, who advanced Aubrey de Vere for his singular wisedome with sundry favours and benefits, as namely with the Chamberlainship of England, and Portgreveship of the City of London. To his son Aubrey, Henry the Second (before hee was established King, and when hee used onely this stile, Henry Sonne to King Henries daughter, right heire of England and Normandie ) restored first the Chamberlan-shippe, which hee had lost in the civill broiles, and then offered unto him which of the Titles he himselfe would choose, of these foure Earledomes: Dorset, Wilshire, Barkshire, and Oxfordshire ; that he might di∣vert him from Stephen then usurping the Kingdome, and assure him to himselfe. And in the end both Maude the Empresse, and Henry also her son being now come to the Crowne by their severall Charters created him Earle of Oxford. Among those that descended from him, (not to recount every one in their course and order) these were they that purchased greatest fame and honour: Robert de Vere, who being in very high favour with King Richard the second was honoured with these new and strange dignities not heard of before, namely, Marquesse of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland: of which, as one said, he left nothing at all to himselfe, but to his Tombe titles, and to the world matter of talke. For, shortly after through the spitefull envy of the Nobles as much against the King as against him, he was dispoiled of his estate, and ended his dayes miserably in exile. Iohn the First of that name so trusty and true to the House of Lancaster, that both Hee and his Sonne and Heire Aubrey lost their heads therefore together in the First yeere of King Edward the Fourth. Iohn his se∣cond Sonne a right skilfull, and expert Martiall man, neverthelesse was most firme and faithfull to the said House of Lancaster, fought in sundry battells against King Edward the Fourth, defended and made good for a while Saint Michaels Mount, and was an especiall assistant unto Henry the Seaventh in attaining to the Kingdome. Another Iohn likewise in the reigne of Henry the Eighth, a Man in all parts of his life so sincere, so religious, and so full of goodnesse, that hee gained the surname of the Good Earle. Hee was great Grandfather of Henry that is now Earle, and the Eighteenth of this race in Lineall discent, and also Grandfather of Sir Francis and Sir Horatio Vere, brethren, who by their singular knowledge in Mi∣litary affaires, and exploits most valiantly, and fortunately atchie∣ved in the Low-Countries, have added exceeding much honour and glory to themselves, and to the an∣cient Nobility of their Family. This Countie containeth Parish Churches. 280. CATTIEUCHLANI. V Pon the DOBUNI Eastward there confined the people, which Ptolomee calleth according to the diversity of copies, CATTIEUCHLANI, CATTIDUDANI, CATHICLUDANI, and Dio CATTUELLA∣NI. Which of these might bee the truest name, I can not easily say. Yet give me leave I pray you in this place to cast forth my conjecture (although it is an abortive) concerning this point. I have beene of opinion that these were in old time called CASSII, that of this Cassii their Prince was named Cassivellaunus or Cassibelinus : (for so wee finde it diversely written. Also that, of Cassivellaunus name, this very people were by the Grecians termed Cattuellani, Cathuellani and Cat∣tieuchlani. For, Cassii. among the Nations of Britaine, Caesar reckoneth the CAS∣SII; who that they were seated in these parts it is most certaine: and of whose name a prety portion of this Tract is at this day called Caishow. And seeing that Cassivellaunus ruled this Country as it appeareth by Caesar, and in the said name of his this denomination of CASSII doth most plainly be∣wray it selfe; it may seeme probable enough that Cassivellaunus, was so na∣med, as one would say, The Prince of the Cassii. And unlesse it were so, why should Dio name this Cassivellaunus, Suellan, for Vellan, and Nin∣nius the Britan, Belin. call him, not Cassibellinus, but Bellinus; as though that Bellinus were the proper name either of the Man, or of his Dignity? Neither let it seeme strange, that Princes in old time tooke names of their owne Nati∣ons. The Catti in Germanie had their Cattimarus, the Teutons their Teu∣tomarus and Teutobochus, the Daci their Decebalus, and the Goths their Gottiso. And what should let, but that our Cassii might have their Cassibelinus? Considering that Belinus hath beene an usuall name in this Island: and some have thought; that Cunobelinus who reigned amongst the Iceni, was so called, as one would say, the Belinus of the Iceni. From this Cas∣sivellaunus therefore, if the Greeke writers have not wrested these names Cattuellani and Cattieuchlani, &c. I confesse, that in this matter mine eye-sight fayleth mee altogether, and I see plainely nothing. But whence this people should come to bee named CASSII, I know not, unlesse happily it were of their Martiall prowesse. For, Servius Honoratus writeth, that the ancient Gaules who spake the same language that Britans did, called hardy and valiant men, Gessos: Whence Ninnius interpreteth Cethilou (a Brittish word,) The seede of Warriours. Now that these excelled in Warlike prowesse it is manifest: for, before Caesars comming, they had war∣red continually with their Neighbours, they had reduced part of the DOBU∣NI under their subjection; the Britans had chosen their Prince, Generall over all their forces in the Warre against Caesar, and they had enlarged their Empire and name farre abroad every way; For, all those generally were knowne by the name of CASSII, or CATTIEUCHLANI who now take up three Shires or Counties, to wit, Buckingham-shire, Bedford-shire and Hertford-shire. Of whom I am now to speake in order, and that briefely, be∣cause I have not much to say of any of them. BUCKINGHĀ Comitatus, in quo olim insederunt CATTIEUCHLANI BVCKINGHAM-SHIRE. W Hereas Buckingham-shire is given to bring forth Beech trees plentifully, which the English-Saxons in elder times called Bucken, it may seeme conjecturally that Buckingham the chiefe Towne, and so the whole shire tooke the name from Beech trees. For there is a Country in Germany bearing Beech trees, named Buchonia: and with us, a towne in Norfolke called Buckenham, fruitfull of Beech, as I have beene enformed. This shire carrying but a small bredth, runneth forth in length from the Tamis North-ward. On the South-side it looketh into Barke-shire, severed from it by the river Tamis: on the West, Oxford-shire; from the North it hath Northhampton-shire, and from the East first Bedford-shire, then Hertford-shire, and afterward Middle-sex. The Country generally is of a rich plentifull soile, and passing full of Inhabitants, who chiefly employ themselves in graizing of cattell. It is divided into two parts, whereof the one bending into the South and East, and ri∣sing into hills, they call Chilterne, in the English-Saxon tongue : the other lying under it North-ward is named the Vale. Chiltern got that name according to the very nature of the soile of Chalky marle, Chiltern. which the ancient English men termed Cylt or Chilt. For, all of it mounteth aloft with whitish hills, standing upon a mixt earth of Clay and Chalke clad with groves and woods, wherein is much Beech, and it was altogether unpassable in times past by reason of trees, untill that Leofstane Abbot of Saint Albans did cut them downe, be∣cause they yeelded a place of refuge for theeves. In it, where the Tamis glideth at the foote of those hills with a winding course, Marlow. standeth Marlow, a prety towne of no meane credite taking name of the said Chalke commonly tearmed Marle: which being spred upon Corne ground eaten out of heart with long tillage, doth quicken the same againe, so as that after one yeeres rest it never lieth fallow, but yeeldeth againe unto the Husband-man his seed in plentifull measure. Nere unto this, a rill sheaddeth it selfe in the Tamis, making way through low places, Wickham. and where it turneth hath a towne upon it called High Wickham or Wicombe rather, which happily thereof tooke the name, considering that the German Saxons terme any winding reach of river and sea, a Wicke, and Combe a low Valle. And very many places wee meet withall in England named in that respect. This towne for largenesse and faire building is equall to the greatest townes in this shire, and in that it hath a Major for the Head-Magistrate worthily to bee preferred before the rest. About the time of the Normans comming in, Wigod of Wallengford was Lord both of the Burgh of Wicomb, and also of the Villa forinseca (I speake according to the Re∣cord of the ancient Inquisition ) that is, The out Hamlet or Bery. After whose death King Henry the first laid it unto the Crowne. But King John at the length, divided the said Out Berry betweene Robert de Vi-pa t and Alane Basset. North off Wicomb moun∣teth up aloft the highest place of this Region, and thereof it retaineth still the Bri∣tish name Pen. For the head or eminent top of a thing is with them called Pen: and hence it is that the Pennine Alpes, the Ap nine and many Mountaines among us tooke their names. Nere unto this Wickham or Wicomb is Bradenham seated in a very com∣modious and wholsome place, which now is become the principall habitation of the Barons of Windesor: (concerning whom I have already spoken in Barke-shire) ever since that in the memory of our fathers William Lord Windesor seated himselfe here, whose father S. Andrew descended from the old stemme of ancient Barons, King Henry the Eighth dignified with the honour of Baron Windesor. Tamis having entertained the said Ri commeth downe with a rolling streame by Aelan, See in Ba¦shire. famous for a Colledge, the nour e garden (as it were) or plant plot of good let∣ters, which that most vertuous and godly Prince K. Henry the Sixt, as I have already said, first founded. And some few miles forward the river Cole entreth into Tamis, which running here betweene Buckinghamshire and Middlesexe giveth name unto the towne Colbroke: Colbroke. Pontes. which was that PONTES, whereof Antonine the Emperour maketh mention, as the distance on both sides from Wallingford and London doth witnesse: Neither is there any other place else in the way that leadeth from Walling∣ford to London to which the name of Pontes, that is, Bridges, might be more fitly appli∣ed. For this Cole is here parted into foure channels, over which stand as many bridges for the commodity of passengers; whereof that it tooke this name, the very signifi∣cation of the word doth plainly shew. Like as Gephyrae a towne in Bo etia, and ano∣ther Pontes in France, where the County of Ponthieu, our Tunbridg, and others are so called, of Bridges. This County of Ponthieu (to note so much by the way) descended to the Kings of England in the right of Aeleanor the wife of King Edward the First, who by her mothers right was sole and entire Heire of the same. Cole by these se∣verall partitions of his streames compasseth in certaine pleasant Ilands, into which the Danes fled in the yeere of our Lord 894. when Aelfred preassed hard upon them, and there by the benefit of the place defended themselves, untill the English for want of provisions were forced to breake up Siege and leave them. At this di∣vorce and division of the waters Eure or Ever a little Towne sheweth it selfe, which when K. Richard the First had given unto Sir Robert Fitz-Roger, Lord of Clavering, his younger sonnes of this place assumed their surname, to wit, Hugh, from whom the Barons of Eure ; and Robert from whom the Family of Eure in Axolme is sprung and spred. Farther within Land, are these places, which I may not passe over, Burn∣ham better knowne by the Hodengs, Burnham. Lord Huntercombs, and Scudamores, who were Lords thereof and of Beacons-field successively by inheritance, than by it selfe. Stoke Pogeis, Stoke Pogeis. so called of the Lords thereof in old time named de Pogeis, and from them hereditarily devolved upon the Hastings: of whose race Edward Baron Hastings of Loughborrow founded here an Hospitall for poore people, making himselfe one of their society, and his nephew by the brother Henry Earle of Huntingdon built a very faire house: and Fernham, the very same, if I bee not deceived, which was called Fernham Roiall: Fernham▪ Roiall. and which in times past, the Barons Furnivall held by service of finding their Soveraigne Lord the King upon the day of his Coronation a glove for his right hand, and to support the Kings right arme the same day all the while hee holdeth the rega Verge or Scepter in his hand. From the Furnivalls it came by the daughter of Thomas Nevill, The booke of Fines. unto the Talbots Earles of Shrewsbury, who although by exchange they surrendred up this Manour unto King Henry the Eight, yet they reserved this ho∣nourable Office still to them and their Heires for ever. This Cole carrieth downe with him another riveret also, which somewhat above from the West sheddeth it selfe into it: upon it we saw first Missenden, where stood a religious House that acknowledged the D'Ollies their founders and certaine Gentle∣men surnamed De Missenden their especiall benefactours upon a vow for escaping a ship-wracke. I. Rosse. And then in the Vale Amersham, Amersham. in the Saxon tongue which vaunted it selfe not for faire buildings, nor multitude of inhabitants, but for their late Lord Fr ncis Russe Earle of Bedford, who being the expresse paterne of true Piety and noblenesse lived most dearely beloved of all good men. But the prin∣cipall seate of the Earles of Bedford is called Cheineis, Cheneys. standing more East-ward, where both Iohn the first Earle out of this Family, and that noble Francis his sonne lye entombed together. Latimers. Unto which adjoyneth on the one side Latimers, (so na∣med of the Lords thereof, I meane those more ancient Barons Latimer ) before time called Islehamsted, where Sir Edwin Sands Knight, who tooke to wife the onely daughter of the Baron Sands, dwelt, while he lived in a very faire house, and on the other Chesham Bois, where, and at Draiton Beauchamp the Family of Cheneis hath anci∣ently flourished. From hence I passed scarse three miles North-ward, but I came to the ridge of Chilturne-hils, which divideth the whole region a crosse from the South-west to the North-east, passing by many villages and small townes, among which that of greatest note is Hamden, which gave name to an ancient and well spred Family in these parts. In the very East corner of these hils Ashridge a retiring house sometime of the kings standeth upon an ascent; Asheridg where Edmund Earle of Cornewall sonne to Richard king of the Romans founded a religious house for a new Order of religious men in those daies, called Good-men. Bon: Hommes by him first brought into England: Who professed the rule of S. Augustine, and were according to the manner of the Order of the Eremitans clad in skie coloured garments. From this ridge or edge of the Hils, there is a large prospect every way downe into the Vale beneath, The Vale. which I said was the other part of the Shire. This almost throughout is a plaine Champion, standing likewise upon a clay-soile, stiffe, tough, and fruitfull; with pasture medowes most plentifull of grasse and fodder; feeding innumerable flockes of sheepe, whose soft and passing fine fleeces are in request even as farre as to the Turkish Nations in Asia. But it is all naked and bare of woods, unlesse it bee on the West side, where among others is Bernewood whose Forresters surnamed de Borstall were famous in former times. About this For∣rest the yeare after Christs Nativity 914. the Danes furiously raged: and then happily it was, that the ancient Burgh was destroied, whose antiquity Romane coined peeces of money there found doe testifie, which afterwards became the royall house of King Edward the Confessour: Brill. But now it is a Country Village, and in stead of Buri-Hill, they call it short, Brill. In this Vale although it be exceeding full of Townes and Villages, yet very few of them are memorable, Or Isa. and those either upon the River Tame or Vsa, that is, Ouse. Not far from Tame, which watereth the South part of the Vale, upon the rising of a prety hill standeth a faire Mercat Towne well occupied, and compas∣sed about with many most pleasant greene medowes and pastures, commonly called Ailesbury, Ailesbury. of which, the whole Vale is termed the Vale of Ailesbury. The Engish-Sax∣ons called it , when Cuthwulf the Saxon won it in the yeare of our Lord 572. For the Brittish name, whereby it was knowne before, in continuance of time is utterly lost. Famous it hath beene in times past especially for Ediths sake there foste∣red, who having obtained of her Father rewald this Towne for her Dowry, forth∣with by persuasion of the religious people bad the world and her husband farewell, and taking her selfe to the Vale for opinion of holinesse and devotion in that most pregnant and fruitfull age of Saints, became wonderfully renowned, even as farre as to working of miracles, together with her sister Eadburg: of whose name there is a little Towne among the Hils as yet called Eadburton. In the time of King William the Conquerour it was a Manour of the Kings: and certaine yard-lands were here given by the King, with this condition, that the Possessour or Holder thereof (marke ye nice and dainty ones) should finde for the Kings bed when the King came thither. In the Raigne of Edward the First, certaine Gentlemen named de Ailesbury, who bare for their Armes A ure, a Crosse Argent, were by report (but I know not how truely) the Lords thereof; certaine it is, they were in those daies men of the better sort and of great good note, and such as by marriage with the daughter and heire of the Caihaignes (who were in times past Lords of Meddleton Caihaignes ) came to a faire and goodly inheritance, which at last by heires generall came to the De Cadur∣cis. Chaworths, the Staffords of Gra ton, &c. But now, the greatest name and reputati∣on that it hath is by grazing and feeding of Cattaile. Very much beholden also it is unto Justice Baldwin, who not onely adorned it with publique aedifices, but also made a passing faire causey to it (where the way was very deepe and cumbersome) for three miles or thereabout in length. Heere round about in every side flockes of sheepe pasture most plenteously in mighty numbers, loden with fleeces, to the great gaine and commodity of their Masters especially at Quarendon, Quarendon. a Lordship belonging to Sir Henry Lee an honoura∣ble Knight of the Order of the Garter; Eythorp, which sometime was the Dinhams and now the Dorm s Knights, and also Winchindon appertaining to the Family of the Godwins Knights likewise, &c. Lower wee meet with nothing memorable upon Tame, unlesse Cheardesley be (as many thinke it is) the place which was called in the Saxon-tongue Cerdick-flega, of Cerdic the Saxon, who fought a very sharpe and bloudy battaile there with the Bri∣tans. Neere unto it standeth Credendon, Crendon. now Crendon, which was the Capitall house belonging to the Honour of Giffard, for so were those lands termed which fell unto Walter Giffard at the Conquest of England, whose sonne the second Earle of Bucking∣ham and Ermingard his wife, Notesly. built the Abbay of Noteley thereby in the yeare 1112. But his cozen Hugh de Bolebec, from whom by the females the Earles of Oxford are descended, Vi ounts Bolebec. held of him no small possessions in these parts. And the ruines of Bolebec Castle are seene hard by within the Parish of Whitchurch. Neere unto which is Ascot, the principall Mansion house of the Dormers from whence descended the Dutches of Feria in Spaine, and others of noble note. Usa or Ouse, in times past Isa, and the second Isis, which with a soft and still streame passeth through the North part of this Province arising in Northampton-shire, and presently from his head, when being yet but small he closely entereth into this Shire, runneth beside Bittlesden, Bittlesden. The Register of the Abbay. which Robert de Mapertshall Lord of the place gave unto Osbert de Clinton Chamberlaine to King Henry the First a powerfull Courtier, that he might not be punished as a Fellon for stealing away one of the Kings Hounds. But he restored it unto him againe with a cozin of his in marriage: yet lost he the same in the hot broile of the civill war under King Stephen; De Bosco. and Ernald Bois by way of a benefit and courtesie received it at the hands of Robert Earle of Leicester: And hee in the yeare of Christ 1127. founded there a little Monastery for the Cistertien Monks. Then Ouse saluteth Buckingham the Shire Towne, which, as Marian saith, King Ed∣ward the Before the Conquest. elder in the yeare of our Lord 915. fortified with a Rampire and Sconces on both bankes, against the Invasions and assaults of the Danes. Yet was it of no great name, as it may seeme, in the first age of the Normans, seeing that in the Raigne of King Edward the Confessour, (as we read in William Conquerours Domesday booke) it discharged it selfe for one Hide and no more, and had but six and twenty Burgesses. As for the Towne it is seated upon a low ground, but the River Ouse, very commodious for Mils encircleth it about save onely on the North side. The Castle standing in the middest raised upon an hill cast up, whereof no Reliques in manner are now to bee seene, divideth the Towne as it were in twaine. The greater part of the Towne bea∣reth North, wherein standeth the Towne-house, the other toward the South is the lesse, wherein is the Church, and that of no great antiquity: but in it was the Shrine of S. Rumald a child, who being borne in Kings-Sutton a Village thereby was canonized by our forefathers for a childe-Saint, and much famed with many miracles. From hence Ouse hasteneth faire and softly into the North, and more Eastward from the River, Whaddon. neere unto the woods, ye have a sight of Whaddon, the habitation in times past of the Giffords, who were by Inheritance keepers of Whaddon Chase under the Earle of Vlster: and from whom it came to the Pigots, who passed it away by saile and alienation. There standeth now a house of the warlike Family of the Greys, Barons of Wilton, Barons Grey of Wilton. who held the Manour neere adjoyning named Acton, by Ser∣jeanty of keeping one Gerfalcon of their Soveraigne Lord the King. Whereupon that Fa∣mily of the Greys hath for their Badge or Cognisance a Falcon Sejant upon a Glove. Not farre from hence is Thor ton an habitation of the Tirelles, and Saulden, where is a faire and lovely house built by Sir Iohn Fortescue a right honourable knight and deeply learned withall, who for his wisdome was Chauncellor of the Exchequer and Dutchy of Lancaster, and of the Privie Counsell to Queene Elizabeth, and king Iames. On the other side of the River and not farre from the banke stand neighbour-like, Stow a house of the Family of Temple, Leckhamsted an habitation of the Green∣waies, Lillinstone likewise the seat of the ancient Family De-Hairell, commonly called Dairell ; and Luffeld, where in times past was founded a Monastery by Robert Earle of Leicester: but by reason that the Monkes were all consumed with the plague, the house was utterly left desolate. Somewhat higher, on the South side of the River upon the very banke, standeth Stony-Stratford, a Towne of all the rest most frequen∣ted, named so of Stones, The Street way, and a Fourd: For, the houses are built of a cer∣taine rough stone which is digged forth in great abundance at Caversham hard by, and it standeth upon the publike Street commonly called Watlingstreet, which was a Militarie high way made by the Romanes, and is evidently to be seene yet beyond the Towne with the banke or causey thereof, and hath a fourd but now nothing sha∣low, and hardly passable. The Towne is of good bignesse, and sheweth two Chur∣ches, and in the mids a Crosse, though it be none of the fairest, erected in memoriall of Queene Aeleonor of Spaine, wife to Edward the First with the Armes of England, Castile and Leon, &c. also of the Earldome of Ponthieu, whereof she was heire: And where sometimes there had been a Fourd, the River Ous hath a stone bridge over it, which keepeth in the River that was wont, when it swelled with winter flouds, to breake out and overflow the fields with great violence. But upon the banke of the other side which riseth somewhat higher the Towne sometime stood, as the in∣habitants themselves report. And there hard by, is Pasham, a place so called of pas∣sing over the River, so that it may seeme in times past to have been that passage, which King Edward the Elder kept against the Danes, whiles he fortified Torcester: But this passage or Ferry became quite forlet after that the Bridge was built at Stony-Stratford. Now if I should guesse that LACTORODVM, which Antonine the Em∣perour mentioneth stood heere; beside the situation upon the Militarie Highway of the Romanes, and the distance from other places, the signification also of the olde name LACTORODVM fetched out of the British language, Lactorodum. maketh for me and favoureth my conjecture. Which name accordeth passing well with this new Eng∣lish name. For, both names in both languages were imposed of Stone, and Fourd. From hence Ouse runneth hard by Wolverton anciently Woluerington the seat of an ancient familie so surnamed: Leach in the British tongue signifieth stones, Rid and Ryd a Fourd. Wolverton. Newport Paynell. whose lands are named in Records, The Baronie of Wul∣verington, from whom it came to the house of the Longvilles of ancient descent in these parts: and by Newport Painell which tooke that name of Sir Fulcoà Painell the Lord thereof, and was from him devolved to the Barons Someries of Dudley, who heere had their Castle. Then, by Terringham, (which gave both name and habitati∣on to a worshipfull house and of great antiquity) it goeth to Oulney a meetly good mercate towne. This farre and a little further reacheth the County of Bucking∣ham by Vse the limit and bound thereof. The first Earle of Buckingham, Earles of Buckingham. so farre as hitherto I could observe, was Walter surnamed Giffard, sonne to Osbern de Bolebec, a man of great name and reputation among the Normans: Who in a Charter of King Henrie the First is cited among the witnesses thereto by the name of Earle of Buckingham. After him followed his sonne bearing the same name, who in the booke of Abbingdon Abbay is called Earle Walter the younger, and died issuelesse in the yeere 1164. Afterward in the reigne of Henry the Second, that famous Richard Strangbow Earle of Pembroch called Con∣querour of Ireland, who derived his descent from the sister and heir of Walter Giffard the second, in certaine publique instruments bare this title. Then for a long time after lay this title as it were out of use and quite lost, untill that in the yeere 1377. King Richard the Second conferred this honor upon his Unkle Thomas of Woodstock, of whom I have already spoken among the Dukes of Glocester. Of this Thamas his daughter married unto Edmund Earle of Stafford was borne Humfrey Earle of Staf∣ford, created Duke of Buckingham, with an invidious precedence before all Dukes of England by King Henry the Sixt, in whose quarrell he spent his life, fighting most valiantly in the battaile at Northampton. After him succeeded his Graund∣child Henry, by his Sonne Humfrey, who made way for King Richard the Third the usurper unto the Kingdome, and streightwaies practised to depose him: for that he would not restore unto him the inheritance of the Bohuns by hereditarie right be∣longing unto him: but hee being intercepted lost his head for it: and found (but all too late) that Tyrants very often hew downe the staires and steps whereby they ascended: His sonne Edward being restored againe through speciall favour of King Henry the Seventh, by the wicked slights and practises of Cardinall Wolsey fell into disgrace with King Henry the Eighth, and being condemned of high treason, for that among other matters hee had consulted with a Wizard about succession of the Crowne, was beheaded, a noble man exceeding much missed and lamented of good men. Which when the Emperour Charles the fifth heard, he said, as (it is written in his life) That a Butchers dogge had devoured the fairest Bucke in all England: alluding to the name Buckingham, and the said Cardinall who was a Butchers sonne. Ever since which time the splendour of this most noble family hath so decaied and faded, that there remaineth to their posterity the bare title onely of Barons of Stafford, whereas they were stiled before, Dukes of Buckingham, Earles of Staf∣ford, Hereford, Northampton, and Perth; Lords of Brecknock, Kimbalton, and Tunbridge. There are reckoned in this small Shire Parishes 185. BEDFORD Comitatus olim pars CATHIFVCLANORVM BEDFORD-SHIRE. B EDFORD-SHIRE is one of the three Counties, which we said the Cattieuchlani inhabited: On the East-side and the South it joyneth to Cambridge-shire and Hertford-shire, on the West to Buckingham-shire, and on the North to Nor∣thamton-shire and Huntingdon-shire, and by the river OVSE crossing over it is divided into two parts. The North-side thereof is the more fruit ull of the twaine and more woody: the other toward the South, which is the greater, standeth upon a leaner soile, but not altogether unfertile. For it yeeldeth foorth aboundant∣ly, full, white and bigge Barley. In the mids it is somewhat thicke of woods, but Eastward more drie ground and bare of wood. Ouse, Barons Mor∣dant. where it entereth into this shire, first visiteth Turvy the Lord Mordants house, who are beholden to King Henry the Eighth for their Barony: For he crea∣ted Iohn Mordant a wise and prudent man, who had wedded the daughter and one of the coheires of H. Vere of Addington, Baron Mordant ; then runneth it by Harwood a Village, in old time called Hareleswood, where Sampson, surnamed Fortis founded a Nunnery, See Hypodig∣ma pag. 153. and where in the yeere of our redemption 1399. a little before those troubles and civill broiles wherewith England a long time was rent in peeces, this ri∣ver stood still, The water di∣vided. and by reason that the waters gave backe on both sides, men might passe on foote within the very chanell for three miles together, not without won∣dering of all that saw it, who tooke it as a plaine presage of the division ensuing. Af∣terward it passeth by Odill or Woodhill, sometimes Wahull, which had his Lords surna∣med also De Wahul, men of ancient Nobility (whose Barony consisted of thirty knights fees in divers countries) and had here their Castle, which is now hereditarily descended to Sir R. Chetwood knight; as the inheritance of the Chetwoods came formerly to the Wahuls. Wahull. From hence Ouse no lesse full of crooked crankes and windings, than Maeander it selfe, Bletsho. goeth by Bletnesho, commonly called Bletso, the residence in times past of the Pateshuls, after of the Beauchamps, and now of the Honourable family of S. Iohn, which long since by their valour attained unto very large and goodly pos∣sessions in Glamorgan-shire, and in our daies through the favor of Q. Elizabeth of hap∣py memory, unto the dignity of Barons, when she created Sir Oliver the second Ba∣ron of her creation, Lord S. Iohn of Bletnesho unto whom it came by Margaret Beau∣champ an inheritrice wedded first to Sir Oliver S. Iohn, Barons S. Iohn de Blet∣nesh. from whose these Barons de∣rive their pedigree, and secondly to Iohn Duke of Somerset, unto whom she bare the Lady Margaret Countesse of Richmond, a Lady most vertuous and alwaies to be re∣membred with praises; from whose loines the late Kings and Queenes of England are descended. From hence Ouse hastneth by Brumham a seat of the Dives of very ancient paren∣tage in these parts to Bedford, Bedford. in the Saxon-tongue , the principall towne, and whereof the Shire also taketh name: and cutteth it so through the middest, that it might seeme to be two severall townes, but that a stone bridge joyneth them to∣gether. A towne to be commended more for the pleasant situation and ancientry thereof, then for beauty or largenesse, although a man may tell five Churches in it. That it was Antonines LACTODORVM, Places to give entertain∣ment by the way unto Travellers, Bayting and lodging places. I dare not as others doe, affirme: con∣sidering that it standeth not upon the Romans Military road way, which is the most certaine marke to finde out the station and Mansions mentioned by Antonine : nei∣ther are there heere any peeces of Romane money ever digged up, as far as I can learne. I have read that in the Brittish tongue it was named Liswidur or Lettidur: but it may seeme to have been translated so out of the English name. For Lettuy in the British language signifieth Common Innes, and so Lettidur, Innes upon a river: like Bed∣ford in English, Beds or Innes at a fourd. Cuthwulf the Saxon, about the yeere of our sal∣vation, 572. beneath this towne so vanquished the Britans in an open pitch field, that then presently upon it, finding themselves over-matched, yeelded up many townes into his hands. Neither should it seeme that the Saxons neglected it: For Offa the most puissant King of the Mercians choose heere (as we read in Florilegus ) for himselfe a place of sepulture; whose tombe the river Ouse swelling upon a time and carrying a more violent and swifter streame than ordinary in a floud swouped cleane away. Afterwards also when it was rased downe and lay along by occasion of the Danish depredations, Before the Conquest. K. Edward the Elder repaired it, and laid unto it upon the South-side of the river a prety townlet, which in that age, as we finde in the best co∣py of Hovedon, was called Mikesgat. In the time of King Edward the Confessor, as we read in that booke which King William the Conqueror caused to be written when he tooke the survey of England, It defended it selfe for halfe an Hundred in wars, expeditions, and shipping. The land belonging to this towne was never bided. After this it suffered far more grievous calamities under the Normans: For when Paganus. Pain de Beau∣champ the third Baron of Bedford had built heere a Castle, there arose not any storme of civill war but it thundred upon it so long as it stood. Stephen, when with breach of his oath he intercepted to himselfe the Kingdome of England, first forced this Ca∣stle, and with very great slaughter of men won it: afterwards when the Barons had ta∣ken armes against King Iohn, William de Beauchamp Lord thereof, and one of the Cap∣taines of their side, surrendred it unto their hands: But a yeere or two after, Falco de Breaut laid siege thereto, and forthwith the Barons yeelded, and the King in free gift bestowed it upon him. Yet the unthankefull man raised up a world of warre againe upon King Henry the third: He pulled downe Churches to strengthen this Castle, and exceedingly damnified the territory adjoyning, untill the King besieged it; and when after threescore daies he had quelled the stubborne stomackes of these rebels, brought this nest and nourse of sedition into his owne hands. It will not be, I hope, distastfull to the reader, if I set downe heere the maner of assaulting this Castle out of a writer who then lived, and saw it: to the end wee may understand with what devises and engines that age (as wittie well neere as ours to worke men mischiefe) used in their sieges of Townes. On the East-side (saith hee) there was planted one Petrarie and two Mangonells which daily played upon the Towre, and on the West-side two Mangonells which battered the old Towne: also one Mangonell on the South part, and another on the North, which made two breaches and entries in the next walles. Besides these there were two frames or engines of Timber made by Carpenters, erected higher above the toppe of the Tower and Castle for Shootters in brakes, and for discoverers. There were moreover there many frames wherein shooters out of Brakes and slingers were set in await: furthermore there was a frame or engine there, called the Cat, Cattus. under which the Pioners and underminers had their ingresse and egresse, whiles they digged under the Walles of Towre and Castle. Now, was this Castle taken by foure assaults. In the first was the Barbican wonne: in the second, the out Ballie. At the third, fell the Wall downe neere the olde Towre by the meanes of the Miners, where, by the helpe of a chinke or breach with great daunger they became possessed of the inner Ballie: At the fourth, the Miners put fire under the Towre, so that the smoke brake forth, and the Towre was rent asunder, in so much as the clifts and breaches appeared wide, and then the enemies yeelded themselves. Of these Mangonells, Patraries, Trabucks, Bricols, Espringolds, and of that which our ancestors termed the Warwolse, by which before that Gunnes were devised, they discharged volies of mighty huge stones, with great violence, and so brake through strong walles, much might heere be said, were they not be∣side my purpose. But my author proceedeth thus: Falco remained Excommunicate untill he restored unto the King the Castle of Plumpton and Stoke-curcy, with his plate of gold and silver both, and such money as that he had: and from thence was led to London. Meane while the Sheriffe had commandement to demolish and rase the Towre and out Ballie. As for the inward Ballie, when the Bulwarks were cast downe, and both Trench and Rampier laid levell with the ground, it remained unto William Beauchamp for to dwell in: The stones were graunted unto the Chanons of Newenham and Chaldwell, and of Saint Pauls Church in Bedford. Neither yet for all this is there any thing here more worth the seeing, than the remaines of this Castle on the East side of the towne, hanging over the river. On both sides of Bedford stood two prety and very faire religious houses, Helen∣stow now Eustow on the South part, consecrated by Judith wife to Waltheof Earle of Huntingdon unto Helena Great Constantines Mother, and to sacred Virgins: on the East, Newenham, which Roise the wife of Pagani. Paine de Beauchamp translated thither from Saint Paules within Bedford. Ouse is not gone farre from hence, Aeton. but he seeth the tokens of a decayed Castle at Eaton, which was another seate of the family de Beauchamp, and bids Bedford-shire farewell hard by Bissemed, where Hugh de Beauchamp, and Roger his brother founded a little Monastery for the Chanons of Saint Austins order, as appeareth by the Popes Bull. These stand on the farther side of Ouse which yet before from the South is augmented with a namelesse Some call it, Ivell. brooke, at whose confluents is to be seene Temsford, well knowne by reason of the Danes standing Campe, and the Castle there, which they then built, when they wintering in Campe, lay sore upon this Country, and threw downe the Britans Fort (as it is thought) The place whereof, Salenae see∣meth to be that which Antoni∣nus called Sul∣loniaca. now called Chesterfield and Sandie, sheweth oftentimes peeces of Romane coyne, as expresse to∣kens of the antiquity thereof: Neither doe some doubt by the very situation, but that this was that SALENAE, which Ptolomee ascribeth to the Cattieuchlani, if Salndy be the name, Potton. as divers have avouched unto me. Heere I overpasse Potton a little mer∣cat towne, because I finde nothing of it, but that Iohn Kinaston gave it and the Lands adjoyning freely unto Thomas Earle of Lancaster. Neither have I reason to make many words of such places as be situate upon this Brooke, Chicksand. to wit, Chicksand, where Paine de Beauchamp built a little Monastery. Shelford a mercat, Wardon more inward where was a house of Cistertian monkes, and was mother to the Abbaies of Saulterey, Sibton and Tilthey, Biglesward much spoken of and frequented for the horse Fayre there, and the stone bridge. Stratton. From whence Stratton is not farre, the mansion place in times past of the Barons Latimer, afterward of the Enderbeies, and from them here∣ditarily untill our time of the Pigotts. Five miles from the head of this brooke in the very heart and middest well neere of the shire, Ampthill or Amethull. standeth Ampthill upon an hill, a parcell of the Barony of Kainho heere∣tofore and lately a stately house, resembling a castle, and environed with Parks, built by Sir Iohn Cornwale Baron Fanhop, in the reigne of Henry the Sixth with the spoyles wonne from the French; whose goods, as I have read, when Edward the Fourth had confiscated for taking part with the Familie of Lancaster, and indited him, or this house rather, as Fanhop himselfe saith, of high treason▪ forthwith it was gran∣ted unto Edmund Grey Lord of Ruthin, and afterwards Earle of Kent : whose grand∣child Richard passed both it and Ruthin over to King Henry the Seventh, and he an∣nexed the same unto the Kings Sacred Patrimony, as the Civilians terme it, or as our Lawyers use to say, unto the Crowne, and shortly after with the Lands apper∣taining it was made the Honour of Ampthil. From hence more Northward lieth Haughton Conquest, Haughton Conquest. Woburn. so called of a worshipfull and ancient family, which a long time dwelt therein: Westward is Woburn: where now is a free schoole founded by Fran∣cis Earle of Bedford: and where sometime flourished a notable monastery built by Henry de Bolebic for Cistercians, who himselfe entred into this order: Under which, at Aspley Gowiz, Earth turning wood into stone. there is a kinde of earth, men say, that turneth wood into stones: and for proofe and testimony thereof, I have heard say, there was a wooden ladder to be seene in that monastery, that having lien a good while covered all over in that earth, was digged forth againe all stone. More into the East, Tuddington sheweth a faire house, goodly to be seene, which Sir Henry Cheiney made by Queene Elizabeth Baron Cheyney of Tuddington built, and shortly after died Sans-issue, where also in old time Paulin Pever a Courtier, and Sewer to King Henry the Third (as Matthew Paris witnesseth) built a strong house with the hall, chappell, chambers, and other houses of stone, and the same covered with lead, with Orchards also and Parkes to it, in such sort, as it caused the beholders to wonder thereat. We were not gone forward farre from hence but we came to Hockley in the Hole, so named of the miry way in Winter time, very troublesome to Travellers: For the old Englishmen our Progenitors called deepe myre hock, and hocks. So passing along fields smelling sweet in Sommer of the best Beanes, * which with their redo∣lent savour doe dull the quicke sent of Hounds and Spaniels not without fuming and cha ing of Hunters; we mounted up by a whitish chalkey hill into the Chiltern, and streightwaies were at Dunstable. Dunstable. This Towne seated in a chalkey ground, well inhabited, and full of Innes, hath foure Streetes answering to the foure quarters of the world: in every one of which (not∣withstanding the Soile bee most dry by nature) there is a large Pond of stand∣ing water, for the publique use of the Inhabitants. And albeit they bee fed onely by raine water, yet they never faile nor become dry. As for spring-veines there are none to bee found, unlesse they sinke Wells or pits foure and twenty Cubits deepe. In the middest of the Towne is a Crosse or Columne rather to be seene with the Armes of England, Castle and Ponthieu engraven thereon, adorned also with Statues and Images, which King Edward the First erected as he did some others in memoriall of Aeleoner his Wife all the way as hee conveyed her Corps out of Lincoln-shire with funerall pompe to Westminster. That this Dunstable was the very same Station which the Emperour Antonine in his Itinerary calleth MAGIONINIUM, MA∣GIOVINIUM and MAGINTUM no man needs to make doubt, Magiovinium. or to seeke it else where. For, besides that it is situate upon the Romanes high way, there are peeces of the Roman Emperours moneies found otherwhiles in the fields adjoyning round about by the Swine-heards, which as yet they terme, Madning mony: and within a little of the very descent of the Chiltern hils there is a military modell raised up round with a Rampire and Ditch, such as Strabo writeth the Britans Townes were, containing nine Acres of ground, which the people use to call Madning-boure and Madin-boure: in which very name with a little change MAGINTUM most plainly sheweth it selfe. But when the said MAGINTUM, by the injury of warre or time was decayed, king Henry the First heere reedified a Towne, built a royall house at Kings-bury, and planted a Colony to represse the boldnesse of Theeves that heere beset the wayes and lay in wait, as the private History of the Priory, that himselfe founded for the ornament of this his Colony, doth evidently beare witnesse. But heare the very words out of that private History, although they savour of the Barba∣risme of that age. Note that the plot of ground where the two high waies Watling and Ikening meet, was first by Henry the elder King of England Sartabatur. Or clensed by stocking up. cleered, to keepe under and bridle the wickednesse of a certaine most notorious Theefe named Dun, and his Companions, and of that Dun the said place was named Dunstable. The King our Lord built there the Burgh of Dunstable, and made for himselfe a royall Manour, or house neere under that place. The King had in the same Towne both Faire and Mercat. Afterwards, hee founded a Church, and by authority of Pope Eugenius the Third, placed therein Regular Chanons: and feoffed the said Religious Chanons in the whole Burgh by his Charter, and bestowed upon them very many liberties. As for Leighton Buzard on the one side of Dunstable, and Luton on the other, nei∣ther have I reade, * nor seene any thing memorable in them, unlesse I should say that at Luton I saw a faire Church, but the Quier then Roofelesse, and overgrowne with Weedes; and adjoyning to it an elegant Chappell founded by I. Lord Wen∣locke, and well maintained by the Family of Rotheram planted heere by Thomas Ro∣theram Archbishop of Yorke, and Chancellour of England in the time of King Edward the Fourth. Dukes, Earles and Barons of Bedford. Franciscus Alovertus. As touching the Lords, Dukes, and Earles of Bedford. First, there were Barons of Bedford out of the Family of Beauchamp: who by right of inheritance were Almners to the Kings of England upon their Coronation day. Whose inheritance being by females parted among the Mowbraies, Wakes, Fitz-Ottes, &c. King Edward the Third created Engelrame de Coucy Earle of Suesons in France, sonne to Engelrame Lord of Coucy, and his Wife daughter to the Duke of Austria, the first Earle of Bedford, giving unto him his daughter in marriage. Afterwards King Henrie the Fifth advaunced Bedford to the title of a Dukedome: and it had three Dukes: the first was John, the third sonne of King Henrie the Fourth, who most valiantly vanqui∣shed the French men in a Sea-fight at the mouth of Sequana. Seyne, and afterwards (being Regent of France ) slaine in a battaile on land, before Vernoil, who was buried in Roan, and together with him all the Englishmens good fortune in France. At which time he was Regent of France, Duke of Bedford, Alaunson and Anjou, Earle of Maine, Richmond and Kendall, and Constable of England. For so was his stile. Whose Monument when Charles the Eighth King of France came to see, and a Noble man standing by advised him to rase it, Nay answered he, let him rest in peace now being dead, of whom in war while he lived all France had dread. The second Duke of Bedford was George Nevill a very child, sonne to John Marquesse Mont-acute, both whom King Edward the Fourth so soone as hee had raised them to that type of Honours, threw downe a∣gaine, and that by authoritie of the Parliament; the Father, for his perfidious dis∣loyaltie in revolting from him; the Sonne, in dislike of his Father: Howbeit there was a colourable pretense made, that his estate was too weake for to maintaine the port and dignity of a Duke: and because great men of high place if they be not wealthy withall, are alwaies grievous and injurious. The third was Iasper of Hatfield, Earle of Pembroch, Honoured with that title by his Nephew King Henrie the Se∣venth, for that hee was both his Unckle, and had delivered him out of extreame dangers: who being aged and a Bachelar, departed this life, some ten yeeres after his Creation. But within the remembrance of our Fathers it fell backe againe to the title of an Earledome: what time as King Edward the Sixth created Iohn Lord Russell Earle of Bedford: after whom succeeded his Sonne Francis, a man so religious and of such a noble courteous nature, that I can never speake ought so highly in his com∣mendation, but his vertue will far surpasse the same. He left to succeed him Edward his Nephew by his Sonne Sir Francis Russell, who was slaine a day or two before his Father departed this life by Scotishmen in a tumult upon a True-day in the midle marches. 1585. This small Province hath Parishes 116. HERTFORDIAE Comitatus A. Cat∣tifuclanis olim. Inhabitatus. HERTFORD-SHIRE. H ERTFORD-SHIRE, which I said was the third of those that belonged to the Cattieuchlani, lieth on the East and partly on the South side of Bedford-shire: The West side is enclosed with Bedford-shire and Buckingham-shire: The South with Middlesex, the East with Essex, and the North with Cam∣bridge-shire. A rich country in corne fields, pastures, medows, woods, groves, and cleere riverets. And for ancient townes it may contend with the neighbours even for the best: For, there is scarsely another shire in all England that can shew more places of Antiqui∣ties in so small a compasse. In the very limit thereof Northward, Roiston. Chronicles of Dunstable. where it boundeth upon Cambridge-shire, standeth Roiston, a towne well knowne, but of no antiquity: as being risen since the Normans daies. For one Dame Roise, a woman in that age of right great name, Others say sh was the wife of Richard de Clare. whom some thinke to have been Countesse of Norfolke, erected there about a Crosse in the high way, (which was thought in that age a pious worke to put passen∣gers in minde of Christs passion) whereupon this place was for many yeeres called Roises-Crosse, untill that Eustach de Marc adjoined thereto a little Monastery in the honour of Thomas of Canterbury: for then, were Innes built, and by little and little it grew to be a towne, which in stead of Roises Crosse was called Roiston, that is, Roises towne: unto which King Richard the First granted a Faire at certaine set times and a mercat; Now, it is very famous and passing much frequented for Malt: For, it is al∣most incredible, how many buyers and sellers of corne, how many Badgers, yea and Corne-mongers or Regraters flocke hither weekely every mercat day, and what a number of horses loden doe then fill the high waies on every side. Over Roiston Southward is mounted Tharfield among the high hils, an ancient habitation of the familie of Berners, Tharfield. Berners. descended from Hugh de Berners, unto whom in recompence of his valiant service in the Normans Conquest, King William the Conquerour granted faire lands in Eversdon within the county of Cambridge. And in so great worship and reputation flourished his posterity, that Sir John Bourchier, who married the right heire at common law of that familie, being promoted by King Edward the Fourth to the honour of Baron, tooke his addition thereof, and was stiled Baron Bourchier of Berners, and usually Lord Berners. Upon this confineth Nucelles, Nucelles. The familie of Roffes. belonging in times past to the house of the Roche∣sters or Roffes: but all the repute and glory that it hath arose from the inhabitants thereof afterwards, namely the Barons of Scales descended out of Norfolke, but yet the heires of Roffe. Barons de Scales. For King Edward the First gave unto Sir Robert de Scales in regard of his valourous service in the Scotish warres, certaine lands to the value in those daies of three hundred markes by the yeare, and called him among the Barons to the Parliament. Their Eschocheon Gules with sixe escallops argent is seene in many places. They flourished unto King Edward the Fourth his daies, at what time the only daughter and heire of this family was wedded vnto Sir Anthonie Widevile Earle Rivers ; whom being advanced by his owne glorious prowesse and the kings mar∣riage with his sister, the malicious hatred and envie of his enemies most vilanouslie overwrought, and brought to utter destruction. For, King Richard the Third be∣headed him, innocent man as he was. And, when as she died without issue, the in∣heritance was parted in King Henry the Sevenths time betweene Iohn Earle of Ox∣ford, who by the Howards, and Sir William Tindale knight, who by the Bigods of Fel∣bridge, were found next cousens and coheires. The Manour of Barkway hereby ap∣pertained also to those Lords Scales, a well knowne throughfare. Beyond which is Barley that imparted surname to the ancient, * and well allied family of the Barleies ; and on this side Anestie, Anestie. which was not long since the inheritance of the house of Yorke, and in elder times the Castle there was a nest of rebels, wherefore Nicholas of Anesty Lord thereof, was expresly commanded by King Henry the Third to de∣molish so much of it as was raised since the Barons warres against his Father King John. Cl. 2. H. 3. m. 11. But now time hath wholy rased it all. Ashwell. To returne, though disorderly, East-ward is Ashwell, as one would say, The well or fountaine among the Ashes: a Country towne of good bignesse and full of houses, situ∣ate on a low ground in the very North edge of the shire; where there is a source of springs bubling out of a stony banke overshadowed on every side with tall ashes, from whence there floweth at certaine veines continually running such store of water, that forthwith being gathered within banks it carrieth a streame able to drive a Mill and all of a sudden, as it were, groweth to a good big river. Of these wels and ashes together, as most certaine it is that the English-Saxons imposed this new name Ash∣well: so I have been sometime of this opinion, that the ancient Britans, who, as Gildas witnesseth, heaped divine honours upon hils, rivers, fountaines, and groves, from the very same thing and in the same sense called it Magiovinium, and that it was the same which Antonine named MAGIONINIVM. But time hath now discovered a more certaine truth, neither am I ashamed to change mine opinion in this point, see∣ing I take no pleasure at all in mine owne error. And yet to prove the ancientnesse of this towne, the large quadrant adjoyning, enclosed with a trench and rampire maketh much, which by the Romane peeces of coyne digged up there oftentimes, sheweth whose worke it was, and in that Domesday. booke, wherein above 500. yeeres since King William the Conquerour tooke the review and account of all the townes in England, it is in plaine words tearmed a Burgh. Southward we saw Merkat-Baldock, situate upon a whitish soile, wherein as also in Hitching hard by, we read of no antiquity. Then is there seated in a well-husbanded and good ground Wimondley an ancient and famous Lordship, held by the most ho∣nourable tenure with us, Grand-Ser∣geantie. which our Lawyers terme Grand-Sergeanty: namely, that the Lord thereof should serve unto the Kings of England upon their Coronation day the first cup, and be as it were the Kings Cup-bearer. Which honorable office in re∣gard of this Lordship, certaine Noble Gentlemen called Fitz-Tek. Fitz-Tek held in the begin∣ning of the Normans reigne; Argentons. from whom by a daughter it came unto the Argen∣tons. These fetched their name and pedegree from David de Argenton a Norman and a martiall knight, who under King William the Conquerour served in the wars, and they in remembrance heereof gave for their armes Three Cups Argent in a shield Gueules. But at last, for want of issue male in King Henry the Sixth his daies, Eliza∣beth Argenton the sole and entier inheritrice, brought it unto her husband Sir Willi∣am Allington knight, with faire lands thereby and this dignity, from whom Sir Giles Allington now the heire of this family is the seventh, a young Gentleman right cour∣teous and of a generous nature, who I hope will give some new lustre by his vertues unto the ancient worship of his house. Hard by and neere unto the roade high-way, betweene Stevenhaugh and Kneb∣worth the seat of the worshipfull house of the Littons descended from Litton in Darby∣shire, I saw certaine round hils cast up and raised by mans hands, such as the old Ro∣manes were wont to reare for Souldiers slaine in the wars, of which the Captaine himselfe laied the first turfe. Unlesse some man would rather say they had a refe∣rence to the bounds: For such like little hils in old time were reared to signifie the bounds of lands, In the County of Northamp∣ton. under which they used to lay ashes, coales, lime, bricke, and tile beaten to powder, &c. as I will shew else-where more at large. Beneath this, more Southward, the river Lea, by our forefathers named , hath his head: who with a milde course passeth down, first, by Whethamsted a towne plentifull in wheate, whereof it tooke name; which place, John of Whethamsted there borne and thereof named, a man in King Henry the Sixth his daies much renowned by his due desert of learning, made of more estimation. From thence running by Broc∣ket Hall, the residence in late time of the Brockets Knights, approcheth neere unto Bishops Hatfield situate upon the fall and hanging of a little hill: in the upper part whereof stood a house of the Kings, now the Earle of Salisburies, in times past be∣longing to the Bishops of Ely, Bishops▪ Hatfield. whereupon it was named Bishops Hatfield, which John Morton Bishop of Ely reedified. For in this place King Eadgar gave unto the Church of Ely forty hides of land. Afterwards it passeth under Hertford, which in some Co∣pies of Bede is named Herudford, where he treateth of the Synode there holden in the yeare of our Salvation 670. which name some interprete: The red Ford, others, The Ford of Harts. This Towne in William the Conquerours time, discharged it selfe for ten hides and in it were 26. Burgesses, and at that time Ralph Limsey a Noble man built heere a Cell for Saint Albans Monkes. But now it is neither greatly inhabited nor much frequented: and in this respect most of all commended, because it is anci∣ent. For why? it hath given name to the whole County, and is reputed the Shire-towne. A Castle it hath upon the River Lea, built, as men thinke, by King Edward the elder, and enlarged first by the house of Clare, whereunto it belonged. For Gisle∣bert of Clare about King Henry the Second his dayes, was accounted Earle of this Hertford, and Robert Fitz-walter, of the same house of Clare, what time as Stephen sei∣zed into his hands all the Castles of England wheresoever, avouched franckly even to Stephen his face, as we read in Mathew of Paris, that the keeping of this Castle by ancient right appertained to himselfe. Afterwards it was laid unto the Crowne: and King Edward the Third granted unto Iohn of Gaunt his sonne, then Earle of Rich∣mond, who afterward was Duke of Lancaster, this Castle with the Towne and honour of Hertford: where (as the very words runne in the Graunt) hee might according to his estate keepe house and decently make his aboade. From hence Lea falleth downe forthwith to Ware, so named of a barre or dam made to stay water streames, which our Ancestours called a Weare or Ware. This Towne, even at the very first did much harme unto Hertford, and afterwards by rea∣son it became so greatly hanted, darkened, as it were, the light thereof. For, when the Barons warre against King John was waxed hote, this Ware pre∣suming much upon their Lord the Baron Wake, turned London high way to it, whereas before it was but a little Village, and knowne by a Friery which hee foun∣ded: neither was it lawfull to passe that way with any Carts, considering that the Bridge was chained up, the Keyes whereof were in the custody of the Bailiffe of Hertford. Neere about which time Gilbert Marescall Earle of Pembroch a principall and most potent Peere of the Realme, proclaimed heere a disport of running on horsebacke with launces, which they call Tourneaments, under the name of Fortunie, making a scorne of the Kings Authority, Tourneament whereby such Toureneaments were inhi∣bited. To which place when a great number of the Nobility and Gentry were assembled, it fortuned that himselfe as hee ranne at tilt, by occasion that his flinging horse brake bridle and cast him, was trampled under foote and so pittifully dyed. These Justs or Tourneaments were certaine publique exercises of Armes and more than flourishes, practised among noble Gentlemen, and instituted (if wee beleeve Munster ) in the yeare of our Lord 934. having also speciall lawes thereto belon∣ging, which you may finde in the said Munster: and the same exercises were used a long time in such an outragious manner, and with such flaughter of Gentlemen in all places, but in England most of all, since that King Stephen brought them in, that by divers Decrees of the Church they were forbidden, upon paine that whosoever therein were slaine should want Christian Buriall in Church or Churchyard; and heere with us King Henry the Third by advise of his Sages made an Act of Parlia∣ment, that their heires who transgressed in this kinde, should be disinherited. How∣beit, contrary to the said law so good and wholesome, Matth. Paris Anno 1248. this naughty and wicked cu∣stome was practised a great while, and grew not quite out of use before the happy dayes of King Edward the Third. Betwixt these two Townes, Hertford and Ware, distant scarce two miles a sunder, Lea is encreased by two rilles from the North: Asserius termeth them Mimeram and Benefician. I would guesse that to bee Benefician upon which standeth Benington, where the notable family of Bensted had in old time a little Castle: Wood-hall. and also Wood∣hall an habitation of the Butlers, * who being branched from Sir Ralph Butler Baron of Wem in Shropshire, Butler. and his wife heire to William Pantulfe Lord of Wem, were Lords of Pulre-bach, and enriched much by an heire of Sir Richard Gobion, and another of Peletot Lord of this place, in the time of King Edward the Third. I take Mimeran to bee the other brooke whereupon Pukerich is seated, which by the grant of King Edward the First, at the mediation of William le Bland had a Mercate and Faire gran∣ted to it. Standon. Whereupon also neighboureth Standon with a seemely house built by Sir Ralph Sadleir Chauncellour of the Dutchy of Lancaster, Privie Counsellour to three Princes, and the last Knight Baneret of England: a man so advanced for his great services, and staied wisedome. At the backe of Pukerich, Munden Furnivall sheweth it selfe, a place to bee re∣membred if it were but for this, that Geffrey Earle of Britaine gave it to Gerard de Furnivall (of whom also it bare the name) a younger sonne of Furnivall of Shef∣feld. But now let us returne to the River Lea and the Towne of Ware, unto which the Danes being come with their light Pinnaces, and Shallops raised a Fort, as the said Asserius reporteth, which when King Aelfred could not winne by force, hee by digging three severall Chanels, turned aside the water of Lea, that they might not returne with their Vessels; So as ever since it stood the neighbour Inhabitants in small or no stead; untill being brought of late unto his ancient Chanell, it is be∣come more commodious for the carriages of all commodities, &c. Lea is not gone forward farre from Ware, when he entertaineth a Riveret named Stort from the East, which first runneth downe out of Essex by Bishops Stortford, Bishops Stortford. Castle of Way-more. a small Towne fensed sometime with a little Castle set upon a mount cast up of purpose, within a prety Island: which Castle King William the Conquerour gave unto the Bishops of Lon∣don: and of those Bishops it came to be so called; but King John for hatred to Bishop William overthrew it. From thence it maketh his way by Sabridgworth a parcell of the Honor of Earle William Mandevile, and sometime the possession of Geffrey Say, neere Shingle-hall honested by the Owners, the Leventhorpes of ancient Gentry. So on, not farre from Honsdon forfeited by Sir William Oldhall to the Crowne in the time of King Henry the Sixth, which gave a Title of Baron Hunsdon to Sir Henry Cary, through the favour of Queene Elizabeth, unto whom he was Lord Chamberlaine, as who verily, besides his descent from the royall Family of the Dukes of Somerset was by his mother Mary Bolen cozen german to the said Queene. Lea having thus ad∣mitted into him this Riveret, hasteneth now with a merry glee to the Tamis, under Hodesdon a faire through Faire, Hodesdon. to which H. Bourchier Earle of Essex having a faire house at Base thereby (while it stood) procured a Mercat: and then as it were in gra∣tulatory wise saluteth Theobalds, Theobalds. commonly called Tibaulds, which our Nestor of Bri∣taine, the right honourable Baron Burghley, late Lord high Treasurer of England built: an house if we respect the workmanship none more faire and elegant; if the gar∣dens, Orchards, and walkes bedight with Groves, none more pleasant: unto whom especially this River willingly acknowledgeth it selfe beholden for the recovery a∣gaine of his ancient Chanell. But returne we now to places more within the Country, and of greater antiquity. From Hertford twelve miles Westward, stood VEROLAMIUM, a City in times past very much renowned, and as greatly frequented: Tacitus calleth it VERULA∣MIUM, Ptolomee, Verolamium. Saint Albans. UROLANIUM and VEROLAMIUM, well knowne this is in these dayes, neere unto Saint Albans in Caisho Hundred, which the CASSII of whom Caesar maketh mention, in all probability, held and inhabited. The Saxons named it , of the famous High-way Watlingstreet, and also . Neither hath it as yet lost that ancient name, for com∣monly they call it Verulam, although there remaineth nothing of it to bee seene, beside the few remaines of ruined walles, the checkered pavements, and peeces of Roman Coine other whiles digged up there. It was situate upon the gentle descent or side of an hill Eastward, fenced about with passing strong wals, a double Rampire and deepe Trenches toward the South: and Eastward watered with a Brooke, which in old time made a great Meere, or standing Poole. Whereby it was guessed that this was the very same towne of Cassibelaunus fortified with woods and marishes, Cassibelines towne. which Caesar wan: For there was not to be seene any other Poole or Meere in this Tract, to my knowledge. Municipia. In Nero his time it was counted a MUNICIPIUM: whence it is that in Ninius his Catalogue of Cities, it is named Caer-Municip. So that probable it is, that this was the very same CAER MUNICIPIUM, which Hubert Golizius found in an old Inscription. These Municipia were Townes endowed with the right of Romane Citizens, and this name came A Muneribus capiendis, that is, of publique Offices and charges in the Common-wealth: and they had for their States and De∣grees, * Decurions, that is, Gentlemen, and Commons: for their publique Councell, a Senate and People: For their Magistrates and Priests, Duum-virj, Trium-virj to sit in judgement and minister justice, CENSORS: AEDILES, Quaestors and Flamins. But whether this Municipium or towne enfranchised were with suffrages or without, a man cannot easily affirme. A Municip with suffrages they tearmed that which was capable of honourable Offices: like as that other they called without suffrage, which was not capable. In the Raigne of the same Nero, when Bunduica or Boadicia Queene of the Icenes in her deepe love of her Country, and conceived bitter hatred against the Romanes, raised bloudy and mortall Warre upon them, it was rased and destroied by the Britans, as Tacitus recordeth. Hence it is that Suetonius wrote thus: To these mischiefes so great proceeding from the Prince, Verulam an Maldon. there happened (to mend the matter) a grievous losse in Britaine, wherein two principall Towres of great importance, with much slaughter of Romane Citizens and Allies, were put to the sacke and spoiled. Neverthelesse it flourished againe and became exceeding famous and passing well frequented: yea and I have seene old Antiquities of money stamped, as it seemeth heere, with this inscription, TASCIA, and on the reverse VER. Which that learned searcher of ve∣nerable antiquity David Powell, Doctour in Divinity, interpreteth to be The Tribute of Verulamium. For Tasc, as he teacheth me in the British or Welsh tongue soundeth as much as Tribute, Tascia, A Tribute Penny, and Tascyd the chiefe Collector of Tri∣bute. But loe heere is the very peece of money portraied for you to see, which heeretofore also I have exhibited. Some would have this money to bee coined before the comming in of the Ro∣mans: but I beleeve them not. For I have alwaies thought them to bee Tribute money, which being imposed upon the poll and the lands were yeerely exacted and gathered by the Romans, as I have said before. For before that the Romans came, I can scarce beleeve the Britans coined or stamped any money. Yet I remember what Caesar writeth of them: See pag. 97. Britans coines. And they use, saith he, brasse money or rings of iron weighed to a certaine poise. Where the ancient bookes have Lanceis Ferreis, for which the Criticks put in Laminis Ferreis, that is, plates of iron. But let my pen returne againe to the matter proposed, for my meaning is not heere to weave the same web still. As for Verulam, it was famous for nothing so much as for bringing foorth Alban a Ci∣tizen of singular holinesse and faith in Christ, who when Dioclesian went about by exquisite torments to wipe Christian Religion quite out of the memory of men, was the first in Britaine that with invincible constancy and resolution suffred death for Christ his sake. Whereupon hee is called our Stephen, and the Alban Mar∣tyr. Protomartyr of Britaine, yea and Fortunatus Presbyter the Poet wrote thus of him, Albanum egregium foecunda Britannia profert. Fruitfull Britaine bringeth foorth Alban a Martyr of mickle worth. And Hiericus a Frenchman, who flourished 700. yeeres agoe, of the same Alban and his executioner miraculously stricken blinde, made these verses, In the life of Saint German. Millia poenarum Christi pro nomine passus, Quem tandem rapuit capitis sententia caesi, Sed non lictori cessit res tuta superbo, Utque caput Sancto, ceciderunt lumina saevo. Thousands of torments when he had endur'd for Christ his sake At length he dyed by dome thus given. [his head away to take] The Tortor proudly did the feat, but cleere he went not quite, That holy Martyr lost his head, this cruell wretch his sight. In reproch of this Martyr and for the terrour of Christians as wee finde in an old A Legend of his passion and Martyrdome. Agon of his, the Citizens of Verulam engraved his Martyrdome in a Marble stone, and inserted the same in their walles. But afterwards when the bloud of Martyrs had conquered Tyrants cruelty, the Christians built a Church, as Bede saith, of wondrous workmanship, in memoriall of him: and Verulam carried with it so great an opinion of Religion, that there in was holden a Synode or Councell in the yeere of the worlds Redemption 429. when as the Pelagian Heresie, by meanes of Agricola sonne to the Bishop Severianus had budded forth a fresh into this Island, and polluted the British Churches so, as that to averre and maintaine the truth they sent for German Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus Bishop of Troies out of France: who by refuting this heresie gained unto themselves a reverend account among the Britans: but chiefly German, who hath thorowout this Island many Churches dedicated to his memory. And nere unto the ruined wals of this rased city, Saint Germans Chappell. there remaineth yet a Chappell bearing S. Ger∣mans name still, although it be put to a prophane use: in which place he openly out of the Pulpit preached Gods word, as the ancient records of S. Albans church do testifie. Which German (as Constantius flourishing in that time writeth in his life) com∣manded the Sepulchre of Saint Albane to bee opened: and therein bestowed, certaine Reliques of Saints, that whom one heaven had received, should also in one Sepulchre bee to∣gether lodged. Thus much I note by the way, that yee may observe and consider the fashions of that age. Not long after, the English Saxons wonne it: but Uther the Britan, firnamed for his serpentine wisedome, Pendragon, by a sore siege and a long recovered it. After whose death, it fell againe into their hands. For, we may easily gather out of Gildas words, that the Saxons in his daies were possessed of this City. God, saith hee, hath lighted unto us the most cleere Lamps of holy Saints, the Sepulchres of whose bodies, and places of their Martyrdome, at this day (were they not taken away by the woefull disseverance which the barbarous enemy hath wrought amongst us, for our many grievous sinnes) might kindle no small heat of divine charity in the mindes of the beholders: Saint Albane of Verulam, I meane, &c. When Verulam by these warres was utterly de∣caied, Offa the most mighty King of the Mercians built just over against it about the yeere of our Lord 795. in a place which they called Holmehurst, a very goodly and large Monastery in memory of Saint Alban, or as wee reade in the very Charter thereof, Unto our Lord Iesus Christ, and S. Alban Martyr, whose Reliques Gods grace hath revealed in hope of present prosperity, and future happinesse: and forthwith with the Mo∣nastery there rose a Towne, which of him they call Saint Albans. This King Offa and the succeeding Kings of England, assigned unto it very faire and large possessi∣ons, and obtained for it at the hands of the Bishops of Rome as ample priviledges, which I will relate out of our Florilegus, that yee may see the profuse liberality of Princes toward the Church. Thus therefore writeth he. Offa the most puissant King gave unto Saint Alban the Protomartyr, that Towne of his ancient Demesne which standeth almost twenty miles from Verulam and is named Peradventure Wineslow. Uneslaw, with as much round about, as the Kings written Deedes at this day doe witnesse, that are to bee seene in the fore∣said Monastery: which Monastery is priviledged with so great liberty, that it alone is quite from paying that Apostolicall custome and rent, which is called Rom-scot: whereas neither King nor Archbishop, Bishop, Abbat, Prior, nor any one in the Kingdome is freed from the payment thereof. The Abbat also, or monke appointed Archdeacon under him, hath pontificall Jurisdicti∣on over the Priests and Lay-men of all the possessions belonging to this Church, so as he yeel∣deth subjection, to no Archbishop, Bishop, or Legate, save only to the Pope of Rome. This likewise is to be knowne, that Offa the Magnificent King granted out of his Kingdome a set rent or im∣position called That is, of e∣very house a penny. Rom-scot to Saint Peters Vicar, the Bishop of Rome, and himselfe obtained of the said Bishop of Rome that the Church of Saint Alban the Protomartyr of the English nation, might faithfully collect, and being so collected reserve to their proper use, the same Rom-scot throughout all the Province of Hertford, in which the said Church standeth. Whence it is, that as the Church it selfe hath from the King all royall priviledges, so the Abbot of that place for the time being hath all Pontificall ornaments. Pope Hadrian also the fourth who was borne hard by Verulam granted this indulgence unto the Abbats of this Monasterie (I speake the very words out of the Priviledge) that as Saint Alban is distinctly knowne to be the Protomartyr of the English nation: so the Abbat of this Monastery should at all times among other Abbats of England in degree of dignitie be reputed first and principall. Neither left the Abbats ought undone that might serve either for use or ornament: who fil∣led up with earth a mighty large poole under Verulam, which I spake of. The name whereof yet remaineth still heere in a certaine street of the towne named Fish-poole-streete. Neere unto which streete, because certaine ankers were in our remembrance digged up, divers have verily thought (induced thereunto by a corrupt place in Gil∣das ) that the river Tamis sometimes had his course and chanell this way. But of this Meere or Fish-poole, have heere what an old Historian hath written. Abbot Alfrike for a great peece of money purchased a large and deepe pond, (an evill neighbour and hurtfull to Saint Albans Church) which was called Fish-poole, appertaining to the Kings: And the Kings officers and fishers molested the Abbay, and burdened the Monkes thereby. Out of which poole he the said Abbot in the end drained and derived the water, and made it dry ground. If I were disposed upon the report of the common people to reckon up what great store of Romane peeces of coine, how many cast images of gold and silver, how ma∣ny vessels, what a sort of modules or Chapiters of pillars, and how many wonderfull things of antique worke, have been digged up, my words would not carry credit: The thing is so incredible. Yet take with you some few particulars thereof, upon the credite of an ancient Historiographer. Ealred the Abbot in the reigne of King Eadgar, ha∣ving searched for the ancient vaults under ground at Verulam, overthrew all. About the yeere of Christ 960. and stopped up all the waies with passages under ground, which were strongly and artificially arched over head: For, they were the lurking holes of whores and theeves. He levelled with the ground the ditches of the Citie and certaine dens, into which malefactours fled as unto places of refuge. But the whole tiles, and stones which he found fit for building, he layed aside. Neere unto the banke they did light upon plankes of oke with nailes driven into them, cemented with stone-pitch: also the tackling and furniture of Ships as anchors halfe eaten with rust, and ores of firre. A little after he writeth. Eadmer his successor went forward with the worke that Ealfred began, and his pioners overthrew the foundations of a Pallace in the mids of the old Citie, and in the hollow place of a wall as it were, in a little closet, they hapned upon bookes covered with oken boords and silken strings at them: whereof one contained the life of Saint Albane written in the British tongue; the rest the ceremonies of the Heathen. When they opened the ground deeper, they met with old tables of stone, with tiles also and pillars, likewise with pitchers and pots of earth made by Potters and Turners worke: vessels moreover of glasse containing the ashes of the dead, &c. To conclude, out of these remaines of Verulam, Eadmer built a new Monasterie to Saint Albane. Thus much for the antiquity and dignity of Ve∣rulam ; now haue also with you for an over-deale in the commendation of Verulam an Six verses. Hexastich of Alexander Necham, who 400. yeeres since was there borne. Urbs infignis erat Verolamia, plus operosae Arti, naturae debuit illa minus. Pendragon Arthuri patris haec obsessa laborem Septennem sprevit cive superba suo. Hic est martyrii roseo decoratus honore Albanus, civis, inclyta Roma tuus. The famous towne whilom cal'd Verolame, To Nature ought lesse than to painfull art; When Arthurs Syre Pendragon gainst it came, With force of Armes to worke her peoples smart; His seven yeeres siege did never daunt their heart. Heere Alban gain'd the Crowne of Martyrdome, Thy Citizen sometime ô noble Rome. And in another passage. Hic locus aetatis nostrae primordia novit Annos foelices, latitiaeque dies. Hic locus ingenuus, pueriles imbuit annos Artibus, & nostrae laudis origo fuit. Hic locus insignis, magnósque creavit alumnos, Foelix eximio Martyre, gente, situ. Militat hîc Christo, noctéque dieque labori Invigilans sancto religiosa cohors. This is the place that knowledge tooke of my Nativity, My happy yeeres, my daies also of mirth and Jollity. This place my childhood trained up in all Arts liberall, And laid the ground-worke of my name and skill Poeticall. This place great and renowned Clerkes into the world hath sent: For Martyr blest, for nation, for site, all excellent. A troupe heere of Religious men serve Christ both night and day, In holy warfare taking paines, duly to watch and pray. Saint Albans. Verolamium at this day being turned into fields: The towne of Saint Albans raised out of the ruins thereof flourisheth; a faire towne and a large, and the Church of that Monastery remaineth yet for bignesse, beauty and antiquity, to be had in admi∣ration: which when the Monkes were thrust out of it, was by the Townes-men re∣deemed with the sum of 400. pounds of our money, that it might not be laid even with the ground, and so it became converted into a parish Church: and hath in it a very goodly Font of solid brasse, wherein the Kings children of Scotland were wont to be Baptized, which Font, Sir Richard Lea Knight, Master of the Pioners, brought as a spoile out of the Scottish warres, and gave vnto the said Church, with this lofty and arrogant inscription. CUM LAETHIA OPPIDUM APUD SCO∣TOS NON IN CELEBRE, ET EDIN∣BURGUS PRIMARIA APUD EOS CIVI∣TAS INCENDIO CONFLAGRARENT, RICHARDUS LEUS EQUES AURA∣TUS ME FLAMMIS EREPTUM AD AN∣GLOS PERDUXIT. HUJUS EGO TAN∣TI BENEFICII MEMOR NON NISI REGUM LIBEROS LAVARE SOLITUS, NUNC MEAM OPERAM ETIAM INFI∣MIS ANGLORUM LIBENTER CON∣DIXI. LEUS VICTOR SIC VOLUIT. VALE. ANNO DOMINI. M.D.XLIII. ET ANNO REGNI HENRICI OCTA∣VI XXXVI. When Leeth a Towne of good account among the Scots, and Edinbrough their chiefe Cittie were on fire: Sir Richard Lea Knight saved me from burning, and brought me into England. And I being mindefull of this so great a benefit, whereas before I was wont to serve for Bapti∣sing of none, but Kings Children, have now wil∣lingly offered my service even to the meanest of the English Nation. Lea the victor would have it so. Farewell. In the yeere of our Lord, M. D. XLIII. and of the Reigne of King Hen∣rie the Eighth, XXXVI. But to the matter. As antiquitie consecrated this place to be an Altar of Reli∣gion: so Mars also may seeme to have destined it for the very plot of bloudie bat∣taile; For, to let other particulars goe by, when England under the two houses of Lancaster and Yorke bereft, as it were, of vitall breath was ready through Ci∣uill Warre to sinke downe and fall in a sound, 1455. the chiefe Captaines of both sides joyned battaile twise with reciprocall variety of fortune in the very Towne. First, Richard Duke of Yorke gave the Lancastrians heere a sore overthrow, tooke King Henry the Sixth captive, and slew many Honourable personages. Foure yeeres after the Lancastrians under the conduct of Queene Margaret wonne heere the field, put the house of Yorke to flight, and restored the King to his former liberty. About this towne (that I may let passe the mount or fortification which the com∣mon sort useth to call Oister-hils and I take to have been the Campe of Ostorius the famous Lieutenant of Britaine) the Abbats in a pious and devout intent erected a little Nunnery at Sopwell, De prato of the Medow. and Saint Julians Spittle for Lepres, and another named Saint Mary de pree for diseased women: neere unto which they had a great Mannour na∣med Gorumbery: where Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seale of Eng∣land built an house beseeming his place and calling. To this adjoyneth Redborn, which is by interpretation Red-water, and yet the water running thereby (from Mer∣grate sometime a religious house, now a seat of the Ferrers out of the house of Gro∣by ) is no more red than is the Red-sea. Redborn. This Redborne in times past was a place re∣nowned and resorted unto in regard of Amphibalus the Martyrs reliques heere found, who instructed Saint Alban in the Christian faith, and for Christs sake suffered death under Dioclesian. At this day well knowne, for that it is seated upon that common and Military high-way which we call Watlingstreet, and hath hard by Wenmer cal∣led also Womer, a brooke that never breaketh out and riseth, but it foretelleth dearth and scarcity of corne, or else some extremity of dangerous times, as the vulgar peo∣ple doe verily beleeve. Nere unto this Redborn I have some reason to thinke that the Station Duro-Co-Brive stood, Duro-Co-Briue. whereof Antonine the Emperor maketh mention, although the distance of places gaine-saith it. For, as Redborn in our language, so Dur-coch in the British is all one in signification, with Redwater. And verily the tru∣est conjectures that we can make of ancient places, are from antique inscriptions from the lying of Journeies every way, from the analogie and similitude of their names, and from rivers and lakes adjoyning: although they answere not just to the exact account of miles betweene place and place, considering that the numbers may very soone be corruptly put downe, and the waies for shorter passage are as easily altered. Certes it cannot otherwise be, but that Duro-Co-Brive, stood where that Romane Rode-way passeth over this water, to wit under Flansted: for even there, by the high-way side, there is a good big spring breaking out of the ground about seuen Italian miles from Verlam: (for which seuen, through the carelesse negligence of the tran∣scribers, twelve hath crept in.) Which brooke presently, whiles it is yet but small cutteth the high way crosse, and although it carry here no name at all, yet beneath S. Albans town it is called Cot, Briva, what it is. which is neere to the name Co. As for that BRIVA, which is an adjection to many names of places, it signified, as I suppose, among the old Britans and Gaules, a bridge, or a passage, seeing it is found onely where there are rivers. In this Iland there was one or two Durobrivae, that is to say, if I be not de∣ceived Water passages; in Gaules, Briva Isarae now Pontoise, where in times past they passed over the river Ysere. Isara, Briva-Oderae, where they passed over Oderam, and Sama∣robriva (for this is the true name) where there was passage over the river Some. Flamsted. Somewhat above, Flamsted sheweth it selfe upon the hill, which in the time of King Edward the Confessor, Leostane the Abbat of Saint Albans gave unto three knights, Turnot, Waldefe and Turman, for to defend and secure the countrey thereby a∣gainst theeves. But William the Conqueror tooke it from them, and gave it to Ro∣ger of Todeney or Tony, a noble Norman, whose possession it was, but by a daughter it was transferred at length to the Beauchamps Earles of Warwick. Hemsted. From hence I went downe Southward to Hempsted a little mercate towne called Hehan-Hamsted (when King Offa gave it unto the monastery of Saint Albans) situate among the hills by a riveret side, which floweth anon into another, that runneth downe by Berkhamsted. Berkhamsted. Where the Nobles of England, who devised how they might shake off the new yoake of the Normans, assembled themselves together by the perswasion of Fretherike Abbat of Saint Albans: and unto whom William the Conqueror repaired (as we reade in the life of the same Fretherike ) fearing least he should loose the Kingdome with shame, which he had gotten with the effusion of so much bloud. And after much debating of matters in the presence of the Arch∣bishop La frank, the King for the preservation of his peace swore upon all the re∣liques of Saint Albans Church, and by laying hand upon the Holy Gospells unto Abbat Frederick, who ministred the oath, to observe and keepe inviolably the good and approoved ancient lawes of the kingdome, which the holy and devout Kings of England his predecessors, and King Edward especially ordained. But most of those Peeres and Nobles he forthwith evill entreated, turned out of all their possessions, and bestowed this Towne upon Robert Earle of Moriton, and Cornwall his halfe bro∣ther: Who fortified the castle heere with a duple trench and rampier: In which Richard King of the Romanes, and Earle of Cornwall full of honors and yeeres chan∣ged this life for a better. For default of whose issue and offspring King Edward the Third in the end made over this Castle with the Towne unto Edward his eldest sonne, that most warlike Prince, whom he created Earle of Cornwall. Now that Ca∣stle is nothing else but broken walls and a rude heape of stones: above which Sir Edward Cary Knight, and Master of the Kings Jewell-house descended from the fa∣mily of the Caryes in Devonshire, and the Beauforts Dukes of Somerset built of late a very goodly and most pleasant house. In the very Towne it selfe nothing is worth sight save only the schoole, which Iohn Incent Deane of Paules in London, a native of this place founded. Kings Langley. More into the South, standeth Kings Langley, sometime the Kings house, in which was borne, and thereof tooke name Edmund of Langley King Edward the Third his Sonne, and Duke of Yorke: where there was a small cell of Friers preachers, in which that silly and miserable Prince King Richard the Second, after he had been wickedly deprived both of Kingdome and life, was first buried, and soone after translated to Westminster; requited there by way of amends with a brasen tombe for the losse of a Kingdome. Just in a maner over against this, there is another Lang∣ley also, Abbats Lang∣ley. which because it belonged to the Abbats of Saint Albanes is called Abbats Langley: wherein was borne Nicholas surnamed Break-speare, afterwards Bishop of Rome, Pope Hadrian the Fourth. knowne by the name of Pope Hadrian the Fourth: who was the first that taught the Norwegians to the Christian Faith, and repressed the Citizens of Rome aspiring to their ancient freedome; whose stirrop also as hee alighted from his horse, Frederik the First Emperor of the Romanes held, and whose breath was stop∣ped in the end with a flie that flew into his mouth. Watford. Somewhat lower I saw Watford and Rickemansworth, two mercate townes: concerning which I have read nothing of greater antiquity than this, that King Offa liberally gave them unto Saint Alban; as also Caishobery next unto Watford. Caishobery. In which place Sir Richard Morisin Knight, a great learned man, and who had been used in Embassages to the mightiest Princes, under King Henry the Eighth and King Edward the Sixth began to build an house, which Sir Charles his Sonne finally finished. More into the East, the Romanes Military high way went directly from Lon∣don to Verolam by Hamsted-heath, Edgeworth and Ellestre: neere unto which at the very same distance where Antonine the Emperour in his Itinerarie placeth SVL∣LONIACAE, to wit, Sulloniacae, Sa∣lenae in Ptolo∣mee, but mis∣placed. twelve miles from London and nine from Verolam, there re∣maine yet the markes of an ancient Station, and much rubish or rammell is dig∣ged up at an hill which in these dayes they call Brockley-hill. But when the Ro∣manes Empire ceassed in this Island, as Barbarisme by little and little crept in, whiles all partes smoked with the Saxons warre, this, as every thing else, lay a great while relinquished, untill that a little before the Normans comming in, Leofstane Abbat of Saint Albans restored it. For hee, as wee finde written in his life, Cau∣sed the thicke and shady Woods, which lie from the edge of Chiltriae. Chiltern unto London, especially where the Kings high way called Watlingstreete lay to be cut up, the rugged places to be le∣velled, Bridges to be built, and the uneven waies to be made plaine and safer for passage. But about three hundred yeeres since, this way was after a sort againe forsaken, by reason that another way through licence of the Bishops of London was laied o∣pen through High-gate and Bernet. Bernet. This Bernet, for the beast mercat there kept, beginneth now to be famous, but it was more renowned for a field there fought, when in the warre betweene the two Families of Lancaster and Yorke, England dared to doe against her owne bowells, whatsoever ambitious treachery and dis∣loyaltie would command. For, upon Gledesmore hard by, even on Easter day in the morning there was a bloudy battaile most fiercely fought, and that with variable fortune for a great while, by reason that a most thicke mist covered the face of the ground. But in the end the victorie fell happily unto King Edward the Fourth, by occasion that Richard Nevil Earle of Warwicke was there slaine, whom as the favourable indulgence of Fortune made over-stout and bold, yea and dangerous unto Kings: * so his death freed England from all feare of ciuill Warres. Bernet hath for his neighbours Mimmes a seat of a Worshipfull Family of the Coningesbies descended to them by Frowick from the Knolles, Mimmes. ancient possessours thereof; and North-hall, North-hall. where Ambrose Dudley last Earle of Warwicke raised a stately house from the foundations. This County of Hertford had Earles out of the Familie de Clare, Earles of Hert∣ford. who notwith∣standing were oftener called Earles of Clare, from Clare in Suffolke their principall seate. The first to my knowledge was Gilbert, who under the title of Earle of Hertford is put downe as a witnesse in a Charter of King Stephens. Likewise Roger de Clare in the time of King Henry the Second is in the Red-booke of the Exchequer na∣med Earle of Hertford. Likewise his successors, See the Earles of Glocester and in Suf∣folke. whom you may see in their places. But seeing both by right of inheritance, and also through the Princes favour they attained to the Earle∣dome of Glocester, they bare both titles joyntly, and were called unto Parlia∣ments by the name of Earles of Glocester and Hertford. And Richard de Clare who died in the yeere of our Lord 1262. is in plaine termes by Florilegus of Westmin∣ster called Earle of Glocester and of Hertford, where he reporteth this Epitaph com∣posed for him in that age, to his great commendation. Hic p d r Hippolyti, Paridis gena, sensus Vlyssis, Aeneae pietas, Hectoris ira jacet. Chast Hyppolite, and Paris faire, Ulysses wife and slie, Aeneas kinde, fierce Hector here jointly entombed lie. But not long since King Henry the Eighth honoured Sir Edward de Saint Maur or Seym r with the title of Earle of Hertford, who also was created Duke of Somerse by King Edward the Sixth. After whom succeeded in this Earledome his Sonne bearing the same name, a right Honourable personage, and a singular lover of Learning. This Counti hath Parishes. 120. TRINOBANTES. T Hey, whom Caesar calleth TRINOBANTES, Pto∣lomee and Tacitus, TRINOANTES, were next neighbours to the Cattieuchlani, inhabiting in those coun∣tries, which now having changed their names are com∣monly termed Middlesex and Essex. Whence that an∣cient name sprung, See among the Coines the peece stamped with TASC∣NOVANEI. I dare not verily so much as guesse, unlesse it come of the British word Tre-Nant, which is as much as Townes in a vale. For this whole region in a maner lieth low in a valley upon the Tamis. But I doe not greatly please my selfe in this my conjecture. And yet they that inhabited Galloway in Scotland, lying altogether lowe in vallies were of old time in the British tongue called Noantes and Novantes, and in the Vaile of Rhine, in French named Le Vaule, the people in old time called Nantuates, had both their abode and their name thence: so that this conjecture of mine may seeme as probable as that of others, who over curiously have derived Trino∣bantes, of Troy, as a man would say Troia Nova, that is, New Troy. But I wish them well, and that heerein they may please themselves. These were in Cae∣sars time of all these countries well neere the strongest City or State (for, ever∣more he termeth by the name of Civitas, Civitas, that is, Citie, what it signifieth in Caesar. a whole people living under the same lawe) and their King in those daies, was Immanuentius, who being slaine by Cassibelinus, his sonne Mandubratius saving his life by flight, went into Gaule to Caesar, and putting himselfe under his protection returned with him into Britaine. At which time these Arinobantes petitioned Caesar by their Ambassadors, that he would defend Mandubratius from the injuries of Cas∣sibelinus, and resend him to the State, that he might be Governour and beare rule over them: which being done, they gave forty Hostages, and were the first of all the Britanes that yeelded themselves under his allegeance. This Man∣dubratius, that I may note so much by the way, is evermore called by Eutro∣pius, Bede, Androgeus. and the later writers, Androgeus. But whence this diversitie of the name should arise, I am altogether ignorant: unlesse that be true, which I have learned from a very skilfull man in the British history and language both, that this name Androgeus was given unto him for his lewdnesse and perfidi∣ous treason. For, the signification of wickednesse doth most plainely shew it selfe in it: And in the Booke of Triades, among the three Traitors of Britaine, he is counted the most villanous; in that he was the first that made way to bring the forraine Romanes into Britaine, and betraied his Country. After Mandubra∣tius, when as now by reason of hote ciuill warres, Britaine was neglected of the Romanes and left unto his owne Princes and lawes, certaine it is that Cunobe∣line ruled as King in these parts, of whose coine I exhibit heere unto you one or two peeces, although I have already shewed the very same and others heeretofore. Suetonius. Admimus this mans Sonne banished by his Father fled with a small retinue about him to the Romane Emperour Cajus Caligula, and yeelded himselfe. Which so puffed up the young Emperours minde, that as if all the Island had absolutely and wholly yeelded into his hands, he sent glorious letters to Rome, admonishing oftentimes the bearers thereof not to deliver them unto the Consuls, but in the Temple of Mars, and in a frequent assembly of the Senate. When Cunobelinus was dead, Aulius Plautius by commission from Claudius the Emperour set upon this Country. Fasti Capitolini. One of Cunobilinus his Sonnes named Togodumnus he slew, and another called Catacratus he overthrew in the field, over whom also, as we finde in the Capitollin Record of the Romane Triumphes, he rode Ovant in triumph: and that, with so great honour as Suetonius writeth, that Claudi∣us the Emperour went side by side with him both in his going to the Capitoll and also in his returne from thence. And he himselfe shortly after transporting his forces hither, brought these parts within few Moneths into the forme of a Pro∣vince. Thence-forth the Trinobantes rested a while in peace, but that under the Empire of Nero they privily entered into a conspiracy with the Iceni to shake off the Romanes yoke. But Suetonius Paulinus, as Tacitus recordeth, quickly quenched this flame of sedition with a great effusion of Britanes bloud. When the Romane Empire was at length come to an end in Britane, Vortigern the Britane, gave to the Saxons (who kept him prisoner) for his ransome this Country with others, as Ninnius writeth: and it had his peculiar Kings for a long time together, but such as held by homage sometimes of the Kentish Kings, sometimes of the Mercians. Among whom Sebert in the yeere 603. was the first that became a Christian: and Suthred the last King, who being vanqui∣shed by Egbert in the yeere 804. left the Kingdome unto the West-Saxons: But heereof elsewhere more largely: Now let us survey the very Country. MIDDLE SEX OLIMA TRINOBAN¦TIBVS habitata MIDLE-SEX. M IDLE-SEX taketh name of the Middle-Saxons, because the Inhabitants thereof were in the middest betweene East-Sa∣xons, West-Saxons, South-Saxons, and those whom that age called Mercians. It is severed from Buckingham-shire by the River Cole which the Britans called Co, on the West-side, from Hertford-shire on the North-side by a knowne crooked limite, from Essex on the East with the River Lea, from Sur∣rey and Kent on the South by the Tamis. It being comprised within short Bounds lyeth out in length, where it is longest twenty miles, and in the narrowest place it is scant twelve miles over. For aire passing temperate, and for Soile fertile, with sumptuous houses and prety Townes on all sides pleasantly beautified: and every where offereth to the view many things memorable. By the River Cole, Breakespeare, Pope Hadrian the fourth. Haresfield. where it entreth first into this Shire, wee saw Breakespeare an an∣cient house belonging to a Family so sirnamed, out of which came Pope Hadrian the Fourth, of whom erewhile I spake: then, Haresfeld, in old time Herefelle, the possession in King William the Conquerours daies of Richard the Fitz-Gisle∣bert. Uxbridge. sonne of Counte Gislebert. More Southward, Vxbridge anciently Woxbridge a Towne of later time built, and full of Innes, stretcheth out in length. Beneath which is Draiton, reedi∣fied by the Barons Paget; Colham, which from the Barons Le Strange came to the Earles of Darby: and Stanwell ever since the Normans comming in, unto our fa∣thers dayes the habitation of the Family of Windesore. And not farre from hence, Cole after it hath made certaine scattering medow Islands, at two small mouthes fal∣leth into Tamis. Along the side whereof, as a Germane Poet in this our age pretily versified, Tot campos, Sylvas, tot regia tecta, tot hortos Artifici dextrâ excultos, tot vidimus arces, Ut nunc Ausonio Tamisis cum Tybride certet. So many fields and pleasant woods, so many princely Bowres, And Palaces we saw besides, so many stately Towres, So many gardens trimly dress'd by curious hand which are, That now with Romane Tyberis the Tamis may well compare. At the very first entrance, Stanes. Stanes in the Saxon tongue offereth it selfe to our sight, where Tamis hath a woodden Bridge over it. This name it tooke of a meere∣stone heere in times past set up to marke out the jurisdiction that the City of London hath in the River. Runingmead. Neere unto this stone is that most famous Medow Runingmead commonly called Renimed: in which the Baronage of England assembled in great number in the yeere 1215. to exact their Liberties of King John. Whereof in the marriage of Tame and Isis the Poet wrote thus, speaking of the Tamis that runneth hard by. Subluit hic pratum, quod dixit Renimed Anglus, Quo sedere duces armis annísque verendi, Regis Joannis cuperent qui vertere sceptrum, Edwardi Sancti dum leges juráque vellent Principe contempto tenebroso è carcere duci: Hinc sonnere tubae plusquam civilia bella, Venit & hinc refugus nostras Lodovicus in orat. Hence runnes it hard by Medow greene, in English RENIMED, Where close in counsell sat the Lords, as well for armour dred As ancient yeeres right reverend: who sought their soveraigne King John to depose from regall Throne: Whiles that they ment to bring (Contemning Prince) S. Edwards lawes and liberties againe, Inure, which had long time forlet a quite forgotten laine. Hence more than civill Warres, aloud the trumpets ganne to sound, Hence Lewis of France, who soone retir'd, set foot on English ground. From thence it passeth by Coway-stakes at Lalam, where we said that Caesar crossed over the Tamis, and the Britans fensed the banke and Fourd against him with stakes, whereof it had the name. Harrow hill. Tamis passing downe from thence seeth above it Harrow, the highest hill of all this Country, under which Southward there lie for a long way together exceeding rich and fruitfull fields, especially about Heston a small Village that yeeldeth so fine floure for manchet that a long time it hath served for the Kings mouth. Hanworth. Within a little of it is Hanworth, where stands a prety house of the Kings which King Henry the Eighth tooke exceeding delight in, as being a retiring place for his solace and voluptuous pleasure. Hampton Court. Afterwards it runneth hard by Hampton Court a royall Palace of the Kings, a worke in truth of admirable magnificence built out of the ground by Thomas Wolsey Cardinall, in ostentation of his riches, when for very pride, being otherwise a most prudent man, hee was not able to mannage his minde. But it was made an Honour, enlarged and finished by King Henry the Eighth so amply, as it containeth within it five severall inner Courts passing large, environed with very faire buildings wrought right curiously, and goodly to behold. Of which Leland writeth thus: Est locus insolito rerum splendore superbus, Alluitúrque vaga Tamisini fluminis unda, Nomine ab antiquo jam tempore dictus Avona. Hîc Rex Henricus taleis Octavius aedes Erexit, qualeis toto Sol aureus orbe Non vidit. A stately place for rare and glorious shew There is, which Tamis with wandring streame doth dowsse; Times past, by name of Avon men it knew; Heere Henry the Eigth of that name, built an house So sumptuous, as that on such an one (Seeke through the World,) the bright Sunne never shone. And another in the Nuptiall Poeme of Tame and Isis. Alluit Hamptonam celebrem quae laxior urbis Mentitur formam spacijs; hanc condidit aulam Purpureus pater ille gravis, gravis ille sacerdos Wolsaeus, fortuna favos cui elle repletos Obtulit, heu tandem foriunae dona dolores. He runnes by HAMPTON, which for spacious seat Seemes City-like: Of this faire Courtly Hall First founder was a Priest and Prelate great Wolsey, that grave and glorious Cardinall: Fortune on him had pour'd her gifts full fast, But Fortunes Blisse, Alas, prov'd Bale at last. And now with a winding reach the River bendeth his course Northward by Gistleworth, Thistleworth. for so was that called in old time, which now is Thistleworth. Where sometime stood the Palace of Richard King of Romans and Earle of Cornwall, which the Londoners in a tumultuous broile burnt to the ground. From hence Sion sheweth it selfe, a little Monastery so named of the most holy Mount Sion: Which King Henry the Fifth, when he had expelled thence the Monkes aliens, built for religious Virgins to the honor of our Saviour, the Virgine Mary, and Saint Briget of Sion: like as he founded another on the Rivers side over against it for the Carthusian Monkes, named Jesu of Bethelem. In this Sion, hee appointed to the Glory of God so many Nunnes, Priests, and lay brethren divided a part within their severall wals, as were in number equall to Christ his Apostles and Disciples: upon whom when he had bestowed sufficient living he provided by a law, that contenting themselves therewith, they should take no more of any man: but what overplus so∣ever remained of their yearely revenew, they should bestow it upon the poore. But after that in our forefathers time those religious Votaries were cast out, and it be∣came a retiring house of the Duke of Somerset, who plucked downe the Church, and there began a new house. Under this the small water Brent issueth into the Ta∣mis, which springing out of a Pond vulgarly called Brouns-well, for Brentwell, that is, in old English Frog-well, passeth downe betweene Hendon, which Archbishop Dun∣stan borne for the advancement of Monkes, purchased for some few golde Bizan∣tines, Bezantes B zantines of silver valued at two shillings anciently. which were Imperiall peeces of Gold coined at Bizantium or Constantinople, and gave to the Monks of Saint Peter of Westminster: and Hamsted-hils (from whence you have a most pleasant prospect to the most beautifull City of London, and the lovely Country about it.) Over which the ancient Roman military way led to Veru∣lam or Saint Albans by Edge-worth, and not by High-gate as now, which new way was opened by the Bishops of London about some 300. yeares since. But to returne, Brent into whom all the small Rillets of these parts resort, runneth on by Brentstreat, an Hamlet to whom it imparted his name, watereth Hanger-wood, Hanwell, Oisterly Parke, where Sir Thomas Gresham built a faire large house: and so neere his fall into the Tamis giveth name to Brentford a faire throughfaire, and frequent Mercat. Neere which in the yeare 1116. King Edmond sirnamed Ironside, so fiercely charged upon the Danes whom hee compelled by force to retire from the Siege of London, that as fast as their horses could make way, they fled, not without their great losse. From Stanes hitherto, all that lyeth betweene London highway (which goeth through Hounslow ) and the Tamis was called the Forrest or Warren of Stanes, untill that King Henry the Third, as in his Charter we reade; Disforrested and dis∣warened it. Fulham. Then by the Tamis side is Fulham, in the English Saxon tongue , that is, The place of Fowles: the greatest credit and honour whereof is the Bishop of Londons house standing there conveniently, not farre from the City, albeit not so healthfully. Chelsey, as one would say, Shelf ey. Also Chelsey, so named of a shelfe of Sand in the River Tamis as some suppose, but in Records it is named Chelche-hith: a place garnished with faire and stately houses, by King Henry the Eighth, by William Powlet the first Marquesse of Winchester, and by others. But LONDON, London. the Epitome or Breviary of all Britaine, the seat of the British Em∣pire, and the Kings of Englands Chamber, so much overtoppeth all these, as according to the Poet, Inter viburna Cupress s, that is, the Cypresse-tree amongst the Viornes. Ta∣citus, Ptolomee, and Antonine call it LONDINIUM, and LONGIDINIUM: Ammi∣anus LUNDINUM and AUGUSTA; Stephen in his Cities , our Bri∣tans Lundayn ; the old Saxons : Stran∣gers Londra and Londres: the inhabitants London: Fabulous writers Troja nova, that is, New Troy, Dinas Belin, that is, Belins City, and Caer Lud of King Lud, whom they write to have reedified it and given it the name. But these few names and originall derivations together with Erasmus his conjecture, who deriveth it from Lindum a City in the Isle Rhodes I willingly leave to such as well like it. For mine owne part; seeing that Caesar and Strabo doe write that the ancient Britains called those Woods and groves by the names of Cities and Townes, which they had fenced with trees cast downe and plashed to stoppe up all passage: seeing also I have understood that such woods or groves are in the British tongue named Ll wn, Britans towne I encline a little to the opinion that London thence tooke name, as one would say, by way of excellency The City, or A City thicke of trees. But if heerein I faile of the truth, let me with good leave give my conjecture (and heere would I have no man to charge me with incon∣stancy while I disport in conjecture) that whence it had the fame, thence also it tooke the name, even from ships, which the Britains in their language call Lhong: so that Londinum may seeme to sound as much as a ship-Rode, or City of ships. For, the Bri∣tains tearme a City Dinas, whence the Latines have fetched their Dinum. Dinas. And hence it is, that elsewhere it is called LONGIDINIUM, and in the funerall song or Dump of a most ancient British Poet. Bard, Lhong-porth, that is, an harbour or haven of ships ; and by this very terme Bononia, or Bolen in France, which Ptolomee calleth Gessoriacum Na∣vale, in the British Glossarie is named Bolung-long. For, many Cities have drawne their names from Ships, as Naupactus, Naustathmos, Nauplia, Navalia Augusti, &c. But of these none hath better right to assume unto it the name of a Ship-Rode, or Ha∣ven, than our London. For, in regard of both Elements most blessed and happy it is, as being situate in a rich and fertile Soile, abounding with plentifull store of all things and on the gentle ascent and rising of an hill, hard by the Tamis side, the most milde Merchant, as one would say, of all things that the World doth yeeld: which swelling at certaine set houres with the Ocean-tides, by his safe and deepe chanell able to en∣tertaine the greatest Ships that bee, daily bringeth in so great riches from all parts, that it striveth at this day with the Mart-townes of Christendome for the second prise, and affoordeth a most sure and beautifull Roade for shipping. A man would say that seeth the shipping there, that it is, as it were, a very Wood of trees disbranched to make glades and let in light: So shaded it is with masts and failes. Who was the first founder, is by long time growne out of knowledge, and in truth very few Cities there are that know their own first founders, considering they grew up to their greatnesse by little and little. But as other Cities so this of ours fathereth her originall upon the Trojanes, as verily beleeving that Brutus the Nephew in the third descent of Great Aeneas was the builder thereof. But whosoever founded it, the hap∣py and fortunate estate thereof hath given good proofe, that built it was in a good houre and marked for life, and long continuance. And that it is for antiquity ho∣nourable, Ammianus Marcellinus giveth us to understand, who called it in his times, and that was 1200. yeares agoe, an old towne: and Cornelius Tacitus in like manner, who in Nero his daies 1540. yeares since, reported it to have been a place very famous for fresh Trade, concourse of Merchants, and great store of victuals and all things necessary. This onely at that time was wanting to the glory thereof, that it had the name nei∣ther of Free City nor of Colony. Neither verily could it have stood with the Romans profit, if a City flourishing with merchandize should have enjoyed the right of a Colony or Free City. And therefore it was, as I suppose, that they ordained it to bee a Praefecture: Praefecturae. for so they termed townes where Marts were kept and Justice ministred: yet so as that they had no Magistrates of their owne, but rulers were sent every year to governe in them, and for to minister Law, which in publique matters, namely of tax, tributes, tolles, customes, warfare, &c. they should have from the Senate of Rome. Hence it commeth that Tacitus the Panegyrist, and Marcellinus call it onely a towne. And although it was not in name loftier, yet in welth, riches and prosperity it flouri∣shed as much as any other, yea and continued in manner alwaies the same under the dominion of Romans, English-Saxons, and Normans, seldome or never afflicted with any great calamities. In the Raigne of Nero, when the Britans had conspired to re∣cover and resume their liberty under the leading of Boadicia, the Londoners could not with all their weeping and teares hold Suetonius Paulinus, but that after hee had levied a power of the Citizens to aide him, hee would needs dislodge and remove from thence, leaving the City naked to the enemy: who foorthwith surprised and slew some few, whom either weaknesse of sex, feeblenesse of age, or sweetnesse of the place had deteined there. Neither had it susteined lesse losse and misery at the hands of the French, if it had not soddenly and beyond all expectation by Gods pro∣vidence beene releeved. For when C. Alectus had by a deceitfull wile made away C. Carausius a Clive-lander, C. Carausius. Panegyrice, pronounced be∣fore Constanti∣us Caesar, and untruly entitu∣led, unto Maxi∣mian. Frankes put to the sword. who taking vantage of our rough seas, of Dioclesians dan∣gerous warres in the East, and withall presuming of the French, and most venterous Mariners and servitors at sea, had withheld to himselfe the revenewes of Britain and Holland, and borne for the space of six yeares the title of Emperour Augustus, as his coines very often found heere doe shew: when M. Aurelius Asclepiodotus likewise had in a battaile slain Alectus in the third year now of his usurpation of the imperiall pur∣ple and state; those French, who remained alive after the fight, hasting to London forthwith would have sacked the City, had not the Tamis, which never failed to helpe the Londoners, very fitly brought in the Roman souldiers, who by reason of a fogge at Sea were severed from the Navie. For, they put the Barbarians to the sword all the City over, and thereby gave the Citizens not onely safety by the slaughter of their enemies, but also pleasure in the beholding of such a sight. And then it was, as our Chro∣nicles record, that Lucius Gallus was slaine by a little Brookes side, which ran through the middle almost of the City, and of him was in British called Nant-Gall, in Eng∣lish Walbrooke : which name remaineth still in a Street, under which there is a sewer within the ground to ridde away filth; London stone▪ Milliarium. not farre from London-stone, which I take to have beene a Milliary, or Milemarke, such as was in the Mercate place of Rome: From which was taken the dimension of all journies every way, considering it is in the very mids of the City, as it lyeth in length. Neither am I perswaded that London was as yet walled. Howbeit within a little while after, our Histories report, that Constantine the Great at the request of his mother Helena, did first fense it about with a Wall made of rough stone and British brickes, Hellens money oftentimes found under the Walles. The Wall. which tooke up in compasse three miles or thereabout: so as it enclosed the modell of the City, almost foure square but not equall on every side, considering that from West to East it is farre longer, than from South to North. That part of this Wall which stood along the Tamis side is by the continuall flowing and washing of the River fallen downe and gone. Yet there appeared certaine remaines thereof in King Henry the Seconds time, as Fitz-Stephen, who then lived, hath written. The rest now standing is stronger toward the North, 1474. as which not many yeares since was reedified by the meanes of Jotceline Lord Major of London, became of a sodaine new, as it were, and fresh againe. But toward East and West, although the Barons in old time during their warres repaired and re∣newed it with the Jewes houses then demolished, yet is it all throughout in decay. For Londoners, like to those old Lacedemonians laugh at strong walled Cities, as cotte houses for Women, thinking their owne City sufficiently fensed when it is for∣tified with men and not with stones. The Gates. This Wall giveth entrance at seven principall Gates, (for wittingly I omit the smaller) which as they have beene newly repaired, so they have had also new names given unto them. On the West side there be two: to wit Lud-gate of king Lud, or Flud-gate, as Le∣land is of opinion, of a little floud running beneath it (like as the Gate Fluentana in Rome) built againe of late from the very foundation: 1586. and Newgate the fairest of them all, so called of the newnesse thereof, where as before it was termed Chamber∣langate, which also is the publique Goall or Prison. On the North side are foure; Al∣dersgate of the antiquity, or as others would have it, of Aldrict. Aldrich a Saxon: Creple-gate, of a Spitle of lame Creples sometime adjoyning thereunto: More-gate of a moory ground hard by, now turned into a field and pleasant Walkes: which Gate was first built by Falconer Lord Major in the yeare of our Lord 1414. and Bishopsgate of a Bi∣shop, which Gate the Dutch Merchants of the Stilyard were bound by Covenant, Esterlings. both to repaire and also to defend at all times of danger and extremity. On the East side there is Aldgate alone, so named of the oldnesse, or Elbegate, as others terme it, which at this present is by the Cities charge reedified. It is thought also that there stood by the Tamis beside that on the Bridge two Gates more, namely, Belings-gate, a Wharfe now, or a key for the receit of Ships, and Douregate, that is, The Water-gate, commonly called Dowgate. Where the Wall endeth also toward the River there were two very strong Forts or Bastilions: The Towre. of which the one Eastward remaineth yet, usually called, The Towre of London: in the British tongue, Bringwin, or Tourgwin of the whitenesse. A most famous and goodly Citadell, encompassed round with thicke and strong Walles, full of lofty, and stately Turrets, fenced with a broad and deepe ditch, furnished also with an Armory or Magazine of warlike Munition, and other buildings besides: so as it resembleth a big towne: and a man may truly suppose, that those two Castles which Fitz-Stephen recorded to have beene at the East side of this City went both to the making of this one. The other Fort was on the West side of the City, where Fleete, a little Riveret (whence Fleete-streete tooke name) now of no account, but in times past able to beare Vessels, as I have read in the Parliament Rolls, sheddeth it selfe in∣to the Tamis. Fitz-Stephen called this the Palatine Towre or Castle: and they write, that in the Raigne of William the Conquerour it was consumed by fire. Out of the ruines whereof, both a great part of Pauls Church was newly built: and also in the very plot of ground where it stood, Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury founded a religious house for Dominican Friers (whereupon we call the place Blacke Friers. ) Whereby, a man may easily guesse of what bignesse it was. Howbeit there stood in that place in the dayes of king Henry the second ( Gervase of Tilbury in his booke entituled Otia Imperiatia is mine Authour) two Forts or Castles built with Wals and Rampiers: The one whereof belonged to Bainard, the other to the Barons of Mont∣fichet by right of succession. But nothing remaineth of them at this day. Yet some thinke, that Pembroch house was a peece of them, which we terme Bainards Castle, of William Bainard a Noble man Lord of Dunmow, Pat. 6.1. m. 21. whose possession sometime it was, whose successours the Fitz-walters were in right of inheritance the Ensigne Bearers of the City of London, and amongst them Robert Fitz-walter had licence of king Edward the First to sell the site of Bainard Castle to the said Archbishop Robert. Neither was this City at that time walled onely, but also when the Flamin or Pa∣gan Priest was taken away, and Christian Religion established under that good Em∣perour, a Bishop was enstalled in his roome. For, it appeareth, that at the Councell of Arles which in the yeare of grace 314. was held under Constantine the Great, the Bishop of London was present. For, he subscribed, as is to be seene in the first Tome of the Councels in this manner: RESTITUTUS Bishop in the City of London, out of the Province of Britaine: which Restitutus and his successors had their seat and resi∣ance, as some affirme, at Saint Peters in Cornhill. Heereafter, London flourished in such honour, that it beganne to bee called AUGUSTA, and by that name was fa∣mous under the Emperour Valentinian. For, Amianus Marcellinus in his 27. booke writeth thus: London called Augusta. And going forward to London an ancient Towne, which the posterity called Augusta: and in the 28. booke. He went from Augusta, which men of old time called Lundi, whence it came, that when after Constantines time there was a Mint appointed there∣in. (For we reade in his peeces of money, A Mint. which he stamped in honour of his father Constantius, and in others, this inscription P. LON. S. that is, Pecunia Londini signata, that is, Money stamped at London ) he that had the charge and overseeing thereof un∣der the Lord high Treasurer. Comes sacrarum largitionum, is in the booke of Notice termed Praepositus The∣saurorum Augustensiam in Britannia, that is, Provost of the Treasury of Augusta, or London in Britaine. For this name AUGUSTA was a name full of much dignity, full of majesty. And both founders and repairers of Cities when they either hoped or wished that such Cities would become flourishing and powerfull, gave them significative names of good fortune. But among the most auspicious names that be, none is more magnificent, none more auspicate than AUGUSTA. For, this of AUGUSTUS, that most gracious and mighty Emperour Octavianus tooke unto himselfe not without the judgement of the best learned. Sirnamed he was, saith Dio, Augustus, as one of great Majesty above the nature of man. For, what things be most honourable and sacred, are called AUGUSTA; Neither had London this name for so high an honour without the Li∣cence of the Romane Emperours. For that names could not bee imposed to Cities without licence, Virgil noteth in that Verse of his: Urbem appellabant, permisso nomine, Acestam. The City, by permission, ACESTA they did name. But as continuance of time hath out-worne this so honorable a name of Augusta: so it hath confirmed that other more ancient name, Londinum. Whiles it enjoyed the foresaid name Augusta, it scaped faire from destruction by a rebellious rout of Ran∣sackers: but Theodosius the father of Theodosius the Emperour did cut them in peeces whiles they were encombred with their spoiles, and entred, as Marcianus saith, with exceeding great joy in triumphant manner into the City distressed before and overwhelmed with grievous calamities. And marching with his Army from thence, he by his valiant prowesse so freed Britain from those intolerable miseries and dangers wherewith it was beset, that the Romans, as witnesseth Symmachus, honored him among other ancient worthies and men of honourable Renowne, with the Statue of a man of Armes. Not long after, when the Romans Empire in Britaine was come to an end, in that publique destiny and fatall fall of the whole State, it fell into the English-Saxons hands: but in what sort, it is not agreed upon among Writers. For mine owne part, I am of opinion, that Vortigern, to redeeme himselfe being taken Prisoner, de∣livered it for his ransome unto Hengest the Saxon: considering that it belonged to the East-Saxons, whose Country, as Writers doe record, Vortigerne upon that con∣dition made over unto Hengest. At which time the State of the Church went to wracke and endured sore af∣flictions, the Pastours were either slaine or forced to flye, their flockes driven away, and after havocke made of all, as well Church goods as others, Theon the last Bi∣shop of London of British bloud, was faine to hide the holy Reliques of Saints, for a memoriall (as mine Authour saith) and not for any Superstition. Reliques hid∣den for a re∣membrance. But although those dayes of the English-Saxons were such as that a man might truely say: Mars then brandished and shooke his weapons, yet was London never the lesse, as Bede testifieth, a Towne of Trade and Traffique, Frequented with many Nations resorting thither by sea and land. But afterwards, when a more gracious gale of peace brea∣thed favourably upon this wearied Island, and the English-Saxons beganne to pro∣fesse Christianity, 610. Saint Pauls Church. it also beganne a fresh to flourish againe. For, Aethelbert King of Kent, under whom Sebert reigned in this Tract, as it were, his Vassall and by courtesie, founded heere a Church and consecrated it to Saint Paul, which being eftsoones reedified and repaired became at length most stately and magnificent, endowed also with faire Livings and Revenewes, wherewith are maintained, a Bishop, a Deane, and Chaunter, a Chancellour, and a Treasurer, five Archdea∣cons, thirty Prebendaries and divers others. The East part of this Church, which seemeth to bee the newer and curious∣ly wrought, having under it a very faire Arched Vault, which also is Saint Faithes Church, was begunne of the ruines of that Palatine Castle (which I speake of) by Maurice the Bishop; about the yeare of our Lord 1086. when as before time it had beene consumed by a woefull accidentall fire: whereof, William of Malmesbury writeth thus: The beauty thereof is so magnificent, that it deserveth to bee numbered in the ranke of most excellent Edifices: so large is that Ar∣ched Vault underneath, and the Church above it of such capacity, that it may seeme sufficient to receive any multitude of people whatsoever. Bishop. Because therefore Maurice carried a minde be∣yond all measure in this project, he betooke the charge and cost of so laborious a peece of worke unto those that came after. In the end when B. Richard his Successour had made over all the Revenewes belonging unto the Bishopricke to the building of this Cathedrall Church, sustai∣ning himselfe and his Family otherwise in the meane while, hee seemed in a manner to have done just nothing: so that hee spent his whole substance profusely heereabout, and yet small effect came thereof. The West Part, as also the Crosse-yle are spacious, high built, and good∣ly to bee seene by reason of the huge Pillars and a right beautifull arched Roufe of stone. Where these foure Parts crosse one another and meete in one, there riseth uppe a mighty bigge and lofty Towre, upon which stood a Spire Steeple covered with Leade, mounting uppe to a wonderfull height: for it was no lesse than five hundered and foure and thirty foote high from the Ground; which in the yeare of our Lord 1087. was set on fire with Lightning, and burnt, with a great part of the City: but beeing rebuilt, was of late in mine owne remem∣brance, when I was but a Childe, 1560. fired againe with Lightning, and is not as yet re∣edified. The measure also and proportion of this so stately building, I will heere put downe out of an old Writer, which you may, if it please you, reade: Saint Pauls Church containeth in length sixe hundered ninety foote: the breadth thereof is one hundered and thirty foote: the height of the West Arched Roufe from the Ground car∣rieth an hundered and two foote: and the new Fabrique from the Ground is foure score and eight foote high. The stoneworke of the Steeple from the plaine ground riseth in height two hundred and threescore foote: and the timber frame upon the same is two hundred sea∣venty foure foote high, &c. The Temple of Diana. That there stood of old time a Temple of Diana in this place some have conjectu∣red, and arguments there are to make this their conjecture good. Certaine old hou∣ses adjoyning are in the ancient records of the Church called Dianaes Chamber : and in the Church-yard, while Edward the First reigned, an incredible number of Ox-heads were digged up, as wee finde in our Annals, which the common sort at that time made a wondering at, as the Sacrifices of Gentiles: and the learned know, that Taurapolia were celebrated in the honour of Diana. Sacrifice of Buls. I my selfe also when I was a boy, have seene a stagges head sticking upon a speare-top, (a ceremony suting well with the sacrifices of Diana ) carried round about within the very Church in solemne pompe and procession, and with a great noise of Horne-blowers. And that Stagge or Hart which they of the house de Bawde in Essex did present for certaine lands that there held, as I have heard say, the Priests of this Church arrayed in their sacred ve∣stiments, and wearing Garlands of flowers upon their heads, were wont to receive at the steps of the quire. Now whether this were in use before those Bawds were bound to exhibite such a Stagge, I wote not: but surely this rite and ceremony may seeme to smell of Dia∣na's worship and the Gentiles errours, more than of Christian Religion. And verily no man neede to doubt, that from them certaine strange, and foraine and hea∣thenish rites crept into Christian religion. Which Ceremonies the first Christians, (as mankinde is naturally a pliant Sectary to superstition) either admitted, or else at the first tolerated, thereby to traine and allure the Heathen, from Paganisme by little and little to the true Service and Worship of God. But ever since this Church was built, it hath beene the See of the Bishops of London: and the first Bishop that it had under the English (about fifty yeares after that Theo of the British Nation was thrust out) was Melitus a Roman consecra∣ted by Austin Archbishop of Canturbury. In honour of which Austin, flat a∣gainst the Decree of Pope Gregorie the Great, the Ensignes of the Archbishop∣ricke, and the Metropolitane Sec, were translated from London to Canturbury. Within this Cathedrall Church, Who were bu∣ried in Pauls Church. About the yeare 680. (to say nothing of Saint Erkenwald, and the Bishops) there lye buryed Sebba King of the East Saxons, who gave over his kingdome for to serve Christ; Etheldred or Egeldred, who was an Oppressour rather than a Ruler of this Kingdome, cruell in the beginning, wretched in the middle, and shamefull in the end: 1016. so outragious hee was in his connivency to a Parricidie committed, so infamous in his flight and effeminacy, William Malmesbury. and so miserable in his death. Henry Lacy Earle of Lincolne; Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Sir Simon de Burlie a right noble Knight of the Garter executed by encroched Authority with∣out the kings assent, Sir Iohn de Beauchamp, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports; Iohn Lord Latimer, Sir Iohn Mason knight; William Herbert Earle of Pembroch, Sir Ni∣cholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seale of England, a man of a deepe reach and exquisite judgement; Sir Philip Sidney, and Sir Francis Walsingham, two fa∣mous knights, &c. and Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellour of England, for whose perpetuall memory Sir William Hatton his Nephew by sister, descended from the ancient Family of the Newports, whom hee adopted into the name of Hatton, dutifully erected a sumptuous monument, well beseeming the greatnesse of his adoptive father. Beside this Church, there is not to my knowledge any other worke of the Eng∣lish Saxons extant in London to bee seene: for why? they continued not long in perfect peace; considering that in short space the West-Saxons subdued the East-Saxons; and London became subject to the Mercians. Scarcely were these ci∣vill Warres husht, when a new Tempest brake out of the North: I meane the Danes, who piteously tore in peeces all this Country, and shooke this City sore. For the Danes brought it under their Subjection: but Aelfred recovered it out of their hands, and after he had repaired it, gave it unto Aetheldred Earle of the Mercians, who had married his daughter. Yet those wastefull depopulators, did what they could afterwards many a time to winne it by Siege; but Or Cnute. Canut especially, who by digging a new Chanell attempted to turne away the Tamis from it. Howbeit ever∣more they lost their labour; the Citizens did so manfully repulse the force of the enemy. Yet were they not a little terrified still by them, untill they lovingly re∣ceived and saluted as their King, William Duke of Normandy ; whom God desti∣ned to bee borne for the good of England against those Spoilers. Presently then, the windes were laid, the clouds disparcled, and golden dayes in deed shone upon it: Since when it never sustained any great calamity to speake of: but through the speciall favour and indulgence of Princes obtained very large and great Immunities, beganne to bee called The Kings Chamber, and so flourished a new with fresh trade and traffique of Merchants, that William of Malmesbury who lived well neere a∣bout that time, termed it, A noble and wealthy City, replenished with rich Citizens, and frequented with the commerce of Occupiers and Factours comming out of all lands. And Fitz-Stephen living also in those dayes, hath left in writing, that London at that time counted an hundred and twenty two Parish Churches, and thirteene Covents of religious Orders: also that when a Muster and shew was made of able men to beare Armes, they brought into the Field under their Collours forty thousand footemen, and twenty thousand horsemen. Then was it enlarged with new buildings, and the spacious Suburbs stretched forth from the gates a great length on every side: but Westward especially which are the greatest, Innes of the Court. and best peopled: In which are twelve Innes, ordained for Stu∣dents of our Common law: whereof foure being very faire and large belong to the judiciall Courts, the rest to the Chauncery: besides two Innes moreover for the Serjeants at Law. Herein such a number of young Gentlemen doe so paineful∣ly ply their bookes, and study the Law, that for frequency of Students, it is not inferiour either to Angiers, Cane, or Orleance it selfe, as Sir Iohn Fortescue in his small Treatise of the Lawes of England doth witnesse. The New Temple. The said foure principall houses, are The Inner Temple, the Middle Temple, Graies Inne, and Lincolns Inne. Those two former named, Old Temple where new stands South∣hampton house in Hol∣borne. Templars. stand in the very place where in times past, during the Raigne of King Henry the Second, Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem consecrated a Church for Knights Templars, which they had newly built according to the forme of the Temple, neere unto the Sepulchre of our Lord at Hierusalem. For, at their first institution about the yeare of our Lord 1113. they dwelt in part of the Temple hard by the Sepulchre, whereof they were so named, and vowed to defend Christian Religion, the Holy Land, and Pilgrimes going to visite the Lords Se∣pulchre, against all Mahometans, and Infidels; professing to live in chastity and obedience; whereupon all men most willingly and with right loving hearts em∣braced them: so that, through the bounteous liberality of Princes and devout people, having gotten in all places very faire Possessions, and exceeding great wealth, they flourished in high reputation for Piety and Devotion: yea and in the opi∣nion, both of the holinesse of the men, and of the place King Henry the Third, and many Noble men desired much to bee buryed in their Church among them. Some of whose Images are there to bee seene, with their legges acrosse. For, so they were buryed in that Age that had Taken upon them the Crosse (as they then termed it) to serve in the Holy Land, or had vowed the same. Among whom was William Marshall the elder a most powerfull man in his time, William and Gilbert his sonnes Marshalles of England and Earles of Penbroch. Upon William the elder his Tombe I some yeares since read in the upper part Comes Penbrochiae, and upon side this Verse: Miles eram Martis, Mars multos vicerat armis. Of Mars I was a doughty Knight, Mars vanquished many a man in fight. * But in processe of time, when with insatiable greedinesse they had hoorded great wealth by withdrawing tith's from churches, Guil. Tyrius. appropriating spiritual livings to them∣selves, and other hard meanes; their riches turned to their ruine. For thereby their former piety was after a manner stifled, they fell at jarre with other religious orders, their professed obedience to the Patriarch of Ierusalem was rejected, envy among the common sort was procured, which hope of gain among the better sort so enkindled, that in the yeere of our salvation 1312. this order was condemned of impiety, and by the Popes authority utterly abolished. The Statute as touching the Templars Lands. 17. Edward. 2. Howbeit their possessions were by autho∣rity of the Parliament assigned to the Hospitalier Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, least that such Lands given to pious and good uses, against the Donours will should bee alienated to other uses. And yet it is apparent out of ancient writings, that this place, after the expulsion of the Templers, See Hospiti∣lars afterwards. was the seat and habitation of Thomas Earle of Lancaster, and of Sir Hugh Spenser King Edward the Second his minion: afterwards of Sir Aimer de Valence Earle of Pembroch, and in the end turned into two Colledges or Innes of Lawyers. Of the rest of these Innes, I have found nothing at all by rea∣ding: But the generall voyce goeth, that the one was the dwelling house of the Lord Greies of Wilton, and the other of the Earles of Lincolne. Nere unto this K. Henry the third erected betweene the New and the Old Temple an house of Converts, for the maintenance of those that were converted from Iudaisme to the Christian Truth: which King Edward the Third appointed afterwards for rolls and records to be kept therein, The Roules. and thereof at this day it is called The Rowls. These Suburbs with houses standing close together, and stately habitations of the Nobles and great Men of the Land along the Tamis side, reach out as farre as to Westminster. Among which these are the most memorable here: Bride-well, where King Henry the Eighth built a royall house for the entertainment of Charles the Fifth Emperour: but now it is an House of Correction: Buckhurst house, or Salisbu∣ry Court, belonging sometimes to the Bishops of Salisbury: the White Freers, or Car∣melite Freers: The Temples whereof I speake: Then without the Bars Essex house, built by the Lord Paget: Arondel house before called Hampton place, and Somerset house built by Edward Semer Duke of Somerset: The Savoy, so named of Peter Earle of Savoy, who there dwelt, which Queene Aeleonor wife to King Henry the Third purchased of the fraternity of Mont-joy, and gave it to her Sonne Edmund Earle of Lanca∣ster. Whose Posterity dwelt in it a long time untill that King Henry the Seaventh dedicated it as an Hospitall for the Poore: Montis-Jovis. Worcester-house, late Bedford-house, Salis∣bury-house, Durham-house, built by Antony Becke Bishop of Durham, and Patriarch of Jerusalem, and thereby the onely ornament of this part the Britain-Burse, built by the Earle of Salisbury, and so named by King Iames: Yorke-house in times past, Bath-house, and Northampton-house now begunne by Henry Earle of Northampton. But what meane I to name these places? None claime them wholy for their owne: Fortune disposeth them every one. Westminster. By this Suburbs Westminster, which sometime was more than a mile distant, is conjoyned so close unto the Citty of London, that it seemeth a member thereof: whereas it is a Citty of it selfe, having their peculiar Magistrates and Priviledges. It was called in times past Thorney, of Thornes: but now Westminster, of the West situati∣on, and the Monastery. Most renowned it is for that Church, the Hall of Iustice, and the Kings Palace. This Church is famous especially by reason of the Inauguration and Sepulture of the Kings of England. Sulcard writeth, that there stood sometimes a Temple of Apollo in that place, and that in the dayes of Antoninus Pius Emperor of Rome it fell downe with an Earth-quake. Out of the remaines whereof, Sebert King of the East-Sa∣xons erected another to Saint Peter, which beeing by the Danes overthrowne, Bi∣shoppe Dunstane reedified, and granted it to some few Monkes. But afterwards, King Edward surnamed the Confessour with the tenth penny of all his revenewes built it new for to be his owne sepulture, and a Monastery for Benedictine Monkes, endowing it with Livings and Lands lying dispersed in diverse parts of England. But listen what an Historian faith who then lived: The devout King destined unto God that place, both for that it was nere unto the famous and wealthy Citty of London, and also had a pleasant situation amongst fruitfull fields, and greene grounds lying round about it: and withall the principall River running hard by, bringing in from all parts of the world great va∣riety of Wares and Merchandize of all sorts to the Citty adjoyning. But chiefly for the love of the chiefe Apostle, whom he reverenced with a speciall and singular affection: He made choise to have a place there for his owne Sepulchre: and thereupon commanded, that of the tenths of all his Rents, the worke of a noble edifice should bee gone in hand with, such as might beseeme the Prince of the Apostles: To the end, that he might procure the propitious favour of the Lord after he should finish the course of this transitory Life, both in regard of his devout Pi∣ety, and also of his free oblation of Lands and Ornaments, wherewith hee purposed to endow and enrich the same. According therefore to the Kings commandement, the worke nobly beganne and happily proceeded forward: neither the charges already disbursed or to bee dis∣bursed are weighed and regarded, so that it may bee presented in the end unto God and Saint Peter worth their acceptation. The forme of that ancient building read if you please out of an old Manuscript booke: The principall plot or ground-worke of the building suppor∣ted with most lofty Arches is cast round with a foure square worke and semblable joynts. But the compasse of the whole, with a double Arch of stone on both sides is enclosed with joynd-worke firmely knit and united together every way. Moreover the Crosse of the Church which was to compasse the midde Quire of those that chaunted unto the Lord, and with a two-fold sup∣portance that it had on either side to uphold and beare the lofty toppe of the Tower in the midst, simply riseth at first with a low and strong Arch: then mounteth it higher with many win∣ding Staires artificially ascending with a number of steps: But afterward with a single wall it reacheth up to the roofe of Timber well and surely covered with Lead. But after an hun∣dred and threescore yeeres King Henry the Third subverted this fabricke of King Edwards, and built from the very foundation a new Church of very faire worke∣manship, supported with sundry rowes of Marble pillars, and the Rowfe covered over with sheets of Lead: a peece of worke that cost fifty yeeres labour in building, which Church the Abbots enlarged very much toward the West end: and King Henry the Seventh for the buriall of himselfe, and his children adjoyned thereto in the East end a Chappell of admirable artificiall elegancy ( The wonder of the World ) Leland calleth it: for a man would say that all the curious and exquisite worke that can bee devised, is there compacted: wherein is to bee seene his owne most stately magnificall Monument all of solide and massie Copper. This Church when the Monkes were driven thence from time to time was altered to and fro with sundry changes. First of all it had a Deane and Prebendaries: soone after one Bishop and no more, namely T. Thurlebey, who having wasted the Church Patrimony surrendred it to the spoile of Courtiers, and shortly after were the Monks with their Abbot set in possession againe by Queene Mary: and when they also within a while after were by authority of Parliament cast out, the most gracious Prince Queene Elizabeth con∣verted it into a Collegiat Church, or rather into a Seminary and nurse-garden of the Church, appointed twelve Prebendaries there, and as many old Soldiers past ser∣vice for Almes-men, fourty Scholers, who in their due time are preferred to the Uni∣versities, and from thence sent foorth into the Church, and Common-weale, &c. Over these she placed D. Bill Deane, whose successour was D. Gabriel Goodman, a right good man indeede and of singular integrity, an especiall Patron of my studies. Within this Church are entombed (that I may note them also according to their dignity and time wherein they died) Sebert the first of that name, Princes inter∣red in West-Minster Church. and first Christian King of the East-Saxons: Harold the bastard son of Canutus the Dane, King of Eng∣land, S. Edward King and Confessour, with his wife Edith: Maud, wife to King Henry the First, the daughter of Malcolme King of Scots: King Henry the Third, and his son, King Edward the First with Aeleonor his wife, daughter to Ferdinand the first King of Castile and of Leon. King Edward the Third, and Philippa of Henault his wife: King Richard the Second and his wife Anne, sister to Wenzelaus the Emperor: King Henry the Fifth with Catharine his wife, daughter to Charles the Sixt king of France: Anne, wife to king Richard the Third, daughter to Richard Nevill Earle of War∣wicke: king Henry the Seventh with his wife Elizabeth: daughter to king Edward the Fourth, and his mother Margaret Countesse of Richmond: king Edward the Sixth: Anne of Cleve the fourth wife of king Henry the Eighth: Queene Mary: And whom we are not to speake of without praise, The Love and Joy of England Queene ELIZABETH of Sacred memory, Queene Eliza∣beth. our late Soveraigne and most gratious Lady, a Prince matchlesse for her heroicke Vertues, Wi edome and Magnanimity above that Sexe, rare knowledge and skill in the Tongues, is here intombed in a sumptuous and stately Monument, which king Iames of a pious minde erected to her memory. But alas, how litle is that Monument in regard of so Noble and worthy a Lady? Who of her selfe is her owne Monument and that right magnificent. For, how great SHE was] RELIGION REFORMED, PEACE WELL GROUNDED, MONEY REDUCED TO THE TRUE VALUE, A NAVY PASSING WELL FURNISHED IN READINES, HONOUR AT SEA RE∣STORED, REBELLION EXTINGVISHED, ENGLAND FOR THE SPACE OF XLIIII. YEERS MOST WISELY GOVERNED, ENRICHED AND FORTIFIED; SCOTLAND FREED FROM THE FRENCH, FRANCE RELIEVED, NETHERLANDS SUPPORTED, SPAINE AWED, IRELAND QUIETED, AND THE WHOLE GLOBE OF THE EARTH TWICE SAYLED ROUND ABOUT, may with praise and admira∣ration testifie one day unto all Posterity and succeeding ages. Dukes. Earles, and other Nobles en∣tombed in Westminster. Of Dukes and Earles degree, there ly here buried: Edmund Earle of Lancaster se∣cond son of K. Henry the third, and his wife Aveline de fortibus Countesse of Albemarle. William and Audomar of Valence of the family of Lusignian, Earles of Pembroch, Alphonsus Iohn, and other children of King Edward the First, Iohn of Eltham Earle of Cornwall, son to K. Edward the second, Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester the yongest son of K. Edward the third, with other of his children, Aeleanor daughter and heire of Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford and of Essex wife to Thomas of Woodstocke, the yong daughter of Edward the fourth, and K. Henry the seventh, Henry a childe two months old son of K. Henry the eight, Sophia the daughter of K. Iames, who, died, as it were, in the very first day-dawning of her age, Phillippa Mohun Dutches of Yorke, Lewis Vicount Robsert of Henault in right of his wife, Lord Bourchier, Anne the yong daughter and heire of Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolke promised in marriage unto Richard Duke of Yorke yonger son to K. Edward the fourth, Sir Giles Daubency Lord Chamberlaine to king Henry the Seventh, and his wife of the house of the A∣rundels in Cornwall, I. Vicount Wells, Francis Brandon Dutches of Suffolke, Mary her daughter, Margaret Douglasse Countesse of Lennox, grandmother to Iames King of Britaine, with Charles her son, Winifrid Bruges Marchionesse of Winchester, Anne Stanhop Dutches of Somerset and Iane her daughter, Anne Cecill Countesse of Oxford daughter to the L. Burghley Lord high Treasurer of England, with Mildred Burghley her mother, Elizabeth Berkeley Countesse of Ormund, Francis Sidney Countesse of Sussex, Iames Butler, Vicount Thurles son and heire to the Earle of Ormond. Besides these, Humfrey Lord Bourchier of Cromwall, Sir Humfrey Bourchier son and heire to the Lord Bourchier of Berners both slaine at Bernet field, Sir Nicholas Ca∣rew, Baron Carew Baronesse Powisse, T. Lord Wentworth, Thomas Lord Wharton, Iohn Lord Russell, Sir T. Bromley Lord Chancellour of England, Douglas Howard daughter and heire generall of H. Vicount Howard of Bindon wife to Sir Arthur Gorges, Eliza∣beth daughter and heire of Edward Earle of Rutland wife to William Cecill. Sir Iohn Puckering Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, Francis Howard Countesse of Hertford, Henrie and George Cary, the father and sonne Barons of Hunsdon both Lords Chamberlaines to Queene Elizabeth the heart of Anne Sophia the tender daughter of Christopher Harley, Count Beaumont Embassadour from the king of France in England, bestowed within a small guilt Urne over a Pyramid. Sir Charles Blunt Earle of Devonshire, Lord Lieutenant Generall of Ireland. And (whom in no wise wee must forget) the Prince of English Poets Geoffry Chauer: as also he that for pregnant wit and an excellent gift in Poetry of all English Poets came neerest unto him, Edmund Spencer. Beside many others of the Clergy, and Gentlemen of quality. There was also another College or Free-chapell hard by consisting of a Deane, and twelve Chanons, dedicated to Saint Stephen: which King Edward the Third in his princely Magnificence repaired with curious workmanship and endowed with faire possessions, so as he may seeme to have built it new what time as he had with his vi∣ctories overrun and subdued al France, recalling to minde (as we read the Charter of the foundation) and pondering in a due weight of devout consideration the exceeding benefits of Christ, whereby of his owne sweet mercy and pity he preventeth us in all occasions, delive∣ring us, although without all desert, from sundry perils, and defending us gloriously with his powerfull right hand against the violent assaults of our adversaries with victorious successes: and in other tribulations and perplexities wherein wee have exceeding much beene encombred, by comforting us and by applying, and in-powering remedies upon us beyond all hope and expe∣ctation. There was adjoyning hereto a Palace, the ancient habitation of the Kings of England from the time of King Edward the Confessor: which in the Raigne of king Henry the Eighth, was burnt by casuall fire to the ground. A very large, stately, and sumptuous Palace this was, and in that age for building incomparable, with a vawmur , and bulwarks for defence : Fitz Stephen . The remaines whereof, are the Chamber, wherein the King, the Nobles, The higher house. with the Counsellers and Officers of State, doe assemble at the high Court of Parliament, and the next unto it, wherein anciently they were wont to be∣ginne the Parliaments, knowne by the name of Saint Edwards painted chamber, because the tradition holdeth that the said king Edward therein dyed. But how sinfull an Act, how bloudy, how foule, how hainous, horrible, hide∣ous, and odious both to God and man, certaine brute and savage beasts in mens shape enterprised of late, The Treason of Robert Catesby. by the device of that Arch Traitour Robert Catesby, with undermining, and placing a mighty deale of gunpowder under these Edifices against their Prince, their Country and all the States of the Kingdome, and that under an a∣bominable pretence of Religion, my very heart quaketh to remember and mention: nay, amazed it is and astonied but to thinke onely into what inevitable darknesse, confusion and wofull miseries, they had suddenly in the twinckling of an eye plun∣ged this most flourishing Realme and Common wealth: But that which an ancient Poet in a smaller matter wrote, we may in this with griefe of minde utter: Excidat illa dies aevo, nè postera credant Secula, nos certè taceamus, & obruta multa Nocte tegi propriae patiamur crimina gentis. That cursed day forgotten be: no future age beleeve That this was true: let us also at least wise now that live Conceale the same, and suffer such Designes of our owne Nation Hidden to be and buried quite in darknesse of oblivion. Adjoyning unto this is the Whitehall, wherein at this day the Court of Requests is kept. Westminster hall. Beneath this is that Hall, which of all other is the greatest, and the very Praeto∣rium or Hall of Justice for all England. In this are the Judiciall Courts, namely: The Kings Bench, the Common Pleas, and The Chancery: And in places neere thereabout, The Star-Chamber, the Exchequer, Court of Ward, and Court of the D teby of Lancaster, &c. In which at certaine set times (wee call them Tearmes ) yearely causes are heard and tryed: whereas before king Henry the Third his dayes, the Court of common Law and principall Justice was unsetled and alwaies followed the kings Court. But he in the Magna Charta made a law in these words: Let not the Common Pleas fol ow our Court, but bee holden in some certaine place. William Lambert. Which notwithstanding some expound thus: That the Common Pleas from thenceforth bee handled in a Court of the owne by it selfe a part, and not in the Kings Bench, as before. This Judgement Hall which we now have, king Richard the Second built out of the ground, as appeareth by his Armes engraven in the stone-worke, and many arched beames (when he had plucked downe the former old Hall that king William Rufus in the same place had built be∣fore) and made it his owne habitation. For kings in those daies sat in Judgement place in their owne persons: And they are indeed the , that is, Judges, Whose mouth (as that Royall Writer saith) shall not erre in Judgement. Prov. c. 16. But the foresaid Palace, after it was burnt downe in the yeare of our Lord 1512. lay desolate, and king Henry the Eighth translated shortly after the kings Seat from thence to an house not farre off, which belonged but a while before to Cardinall Wolsey, and is called White Hall. This house is a Princely thing: enclosed of the one side with a Parke that reacheth also to another house of the kings named S. James (where anciently was a Spittle for Maiden Lepres) built by king Henry the Eighth, on the other side with the Tamis. A certaine Poet termed the foresaid House according to the English name thereof Leucaeum in Latine, as appeareth in these Verses: —Regale subintrant Leucaeum Reges (dederant memorabile quondam Atria, quae niveo candebant marmore, nomen) Quod Tamisis prima est cui gloria pascere cygnos Ledaeos, ranco pronus subterluit aestu. To Royall Palace Kings enter in, sometime LEUCEUM hight. (This famous name those Courts it gave that shone with marble white.) Hard under it with low-sound streame Tamis downe apace doth glide, A River feeding Swannes, wherein he takes especiall pride. The Mues. Hard by, neere unto the Mues so called, for that it served to keepe Hawkes, and now is become a most faire Stable for the kings horses, there remaineth a monument in memoriall of that most pious and kinde Queene Aeleonor, erected by the king Edward the First her most dearely beloved husband: and certes the memory of her loving kindnesse shall remaine worthy to be consecrated to aeternity. For shee, the daughter of Ferdinand the Third, king of Castile, being given in marriage to Edward the first king of England, The love of a wife. accompanied him into the Holy Land: where, when as he was secretly forelaid, and by a certaine Moore wounded with an envenomed sword, and by all the remedies that Physitians could devise was not so much eased as afflicted: shee tooke her to a cure strange I must needs say and never heard of before, Rodericus Toletanum lib. 1. howbeit full of love and kinde affection. For, her Husbands wounds infected with the poison, and which by reason of the malignity thereof could not bee closed and healed, shee day by day licked with her tongue, and sucked out the venemous humour which to her was a most sweet liquour. By the vigour and strength whereof, or to say more truely, by vertue of a wives lovely fidelity she so drew unto her all the substance of the poison, that the wounds being closed, and cicatrized, hee became per∣fectly healed, and shee caught no harme at all. What then can bee heard more rare, what more admirable than this womans faithfull love? That a wives tongue thus annointed, as I may so say, with faith and love to her Husband, should from her well beloved draw those poisons, which by an approved Physitian could not bee drawne: and that which many and those right exquisite medicines effected not, the love onely and piety of a Wife performed. Thus much of Westminster joyntly with London (although as I have said, it is a City by it selfe, and hath a severall jurisdiction from it) because with continued buildings it so joy∣neth thereto, that it may seeme to be one and the same City. Moreover, at the West end of the City, other Suburbs runne a great way in length, Holborne. with goodly rowes of houses orderly ranged, as namely Holborne or rather more truely Oldborne: wherein stood anciently the first house of the Templers one∣ly in the place now called Southampton house. But now there stand certaine Innes, or Colleges of Students in the Common Law: and a City-habitation of the Bi∣shops of Ely, well beseeming Bishops to dwell in: for which they are beholden to John de Hotham Bishop of Ely under king Edward the Third. At the North side likewise there be Suburbs annexed to the City, wherein Iordan Briset a man very wealthy and devout built an house for the Knights Hospitalers of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, Saint Johns Hospitalers after called Knights of the Rhodes and now of Malt. which grew in time so great, that it resembled a Palace: and had in it a very faire Church and a Towre-steeple raised to a great height with so fine workemanship, that while it stood, it was a singular beauty and ornament to the City. These Knights Hospitalers at their first institution, about the yeare 1124. and long after, were so lowly all the while they continued poore, that their Governour was stiled Servant to the poore Servitours of the hospitall of Ierusalem, like as the Master of the Templars, Templars. who shortly after arose, was termed The humble Minister of the poore Knights of the Temple. This religious Order was instituted shortly after Geffery of Bollen had recovered Hierusalem. The Brethren whereof ware a white Crosse upon their up∣per blacke Garment, and by solemne Profession were bound to serve Pilgrimes, and poore people in the Hospitall of Saint Iohn at Hierusalem, and to secure the passages thither, they charitably buried the dead, they were continuall in prayer, mortified themselves with watchings and fastings, they were courteous and kinde to the poore whom they called their Masters, and fed with white bread, while themselves lived with browne; and carried themselves with great austerity. Whereby they purcha∣sed to themselves the love and liking of all sorts, and through the bounty of good Princes and private persons admiring their piety, and prowesse, they rose from this low degree to so high an estate, and great riches, that after a sort they wallowed in wealth. For they had about the yeare of our Lord 1240. within Christendome nine∣teene thousand Lordships or Manours: like as the Templars nine thousand (the Reve∣newes and rents whereof in England fell afterwards also to these Hospitalers.) And this Estate of theirs growne to so great an height made way for them to as great ho∣nours, so as their Prior in England was reputed the Lords of S. Johns. Prime Baron of the Land and able with fulnesse and aboundance of all things to maintaine an honourable Port, untill that King Henry the Eighth advised by them, which respected their private profit, gat their lands and livings into his owne hands, like as hee did of the Mo∣nasteries also. Albeit it was then declared that such religious places being of most pious intent consecrated to the Glory of God, might have beene according to the Canons of the Church, bestowed in exhibition and Almes for Gods Ministers, re∣leefe of the poore, redemption of Captives, and repairing of Churches. Neere un∣to it, Charter-house. where now is to be seene a sightly circuit of faire houses, was the Charter-house, founded by Sir Walter Many of Henault, who with singular commendation served under King Edward the Third in the French warres: and in that place heretofore was a most famous Cemitery, or buriall place in which in a plague time at London, were buried in the yeare 1349. more than 50000. persons: a thing recorded to po∣sterity by an inscription which continued there a long time engraven in Brasse. On this North-West side likewise London hath other great Suburbs, and there stood in old time a Barbacan. Gal ottus Martius. Watchtowre or military Forefense, whence the place was of an Arabicke word called Barbacan, and by the gift of King Edward the Third became the dwelling house of the Vffords ; from whom by the Willoughbies it came to Sir Pengrine Bertey, Lord Willoughbey of Eresby, a man noble and generous, and one of Mars his broode. Neither lesse Suburbs runne out on the North-East and East. In the fields of which Suburbs, whiles I was first writing these matters, there were gotten out of the ground many urnes, funerall vessels, little Images, and earthen pots, wherein were small peeces of money coined by Claudius, Nero, Vespasian, &c. Glasse vials also and sun∣dry small earthen vessels, wherein some liquid substance remained which I would thinke to bee either of that sacred oblation of Wine and Milke, which the ancient Romanes used when they burnt the dead, or else those odoriferous liquours that Sta∣tius mentioneth. —Pharijque liquores Arsuram lavere comam. And liquid baulmes from Aegypt-land that came, Did wash his haire that ready was for flame. This place the Romanes appointed to burne and bury dead bodies, who accor∣ding to the law of the xij. Tables carried Coarses out of their Cities, and enterred them by the high waies sides, to put Passengers in minde that they are, as those were, subject to mortality: Thus much of that part of the City which lieth to the Land. London Bridge. Now for that side where the River runneth, toward the South banke thereof, the Citizens made a Bridge also over the Water reaching to that large Burrough of Southwarke, whereof I have already spoken; First, of wood in that place where be∣fore time they used for passage a ferry boat in stead of a Bridge. Afterwards, under the Raigne of King John they built a new Bridge with admirable workmanship of stone hewen out of the Quarry, See of South∣warke, in Su∣threy. upon 19. Arches, beside the draw-bridge, and so furnished it on both sides with passing faire houses joyning one to another in man∣ner of a Street, that for bignesse and beauty, it may worthily carry away the prise from all the Bridges in Europe. Saint Saviour. In this Burgh of Southwarke, to speake onely of things memorable, there stood sometime a famous Abbay of Monkes, of Saint Benets Order, called Bermondsey, consecrated in times past unto our Saviour, by Aldwin Childe Citizen of London: also a stately house built by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, Suffolkehouse. which having served his turne but a small time, was shortly after pulled downe. S. Thomas Hospitall. These are extant, Saint Thomas Hospitall, reedified or founded rather by the City of London, for the sustenance of feeble and impotent persons: The Priory of the blessed Virgin Mary, called Saint Mary Over Rhe because it standeth beyond the River of Tamis in regard of London, erected by William Pont del Arche a Norman for blacke Chanons. The Bishops house of Winchester built by William Giffard Bi∣shop, for his Successours, about the yeare of our Lord 1107. From which along the Tamis banke there runneth Westward a continued raunge of dwelling houses: where within our fathers remembrance was the Bordello or Lupanarie, for so the Latines terme those little roomes or secret chambers of harlots wherein they filthily prosti∣tuted their bodies to sale, because they after the manner of ravening she-wolves catch hold of silly wretched men and plucke them into their holes. But these were prohi∣bited by King Henry the Eighth, at which time England was growne to excessive lasciviousnesse and riot; which in other Nations are continued for gaine, under a specious shew of helping mans infirmity: Neither, of these Strumpets and brothel∣houses, doe I thinke that this place in our tongue tooke the name Stewes, but of those Ponds or Stewes, Stewes. which are heere to feed Pikes and Tenches fat, and to scowre them from the strong and muddy fennish taste. Heere have I seene Pikes panches ope∣ned with a knife to shew their fatnesse: and presently the wide gashes and wounds come together againe by the touch of Tenches, and with their glutinous slime per∣fectly healed up. Among these buildings there is a place in manner of a Theater for baiting of Beares and Buls with Dogges : and certaine kenels appointed severally for Band-Dogges or Mastives, Band-dogges or Mastives. which are of that strength, and so sure of bit, that three of them are able to take and hold downe a Beare, and foure a Lion: so that the Poet in old time reported truely of our Dogges, in these words: Taurorum fracturi colla Britanni. The British Dogges are able well, To breake the neckes of Buls so fell. Like as he that said, they were more fierce than the Dogges of Arcadian kinde, which are thought to be engendred of Lions. What time as the Bridge was thus made betweene London and this Burrough, the City was not onely enlarged; but also an excellent forme of Common wealth was therein ordained, and the Citizens reduced into certaine distinct Corporations and Companies. The whole City divided into six and twenty Wards: and the Coun∣sell of the City consisted of as many ancient men, Societies or Companies of Citizens. ibus. Wards. named of their age in our tongue Aldermen, as one would say, Senatours, who each one have the overseeing and rule of his severall Ward: and whereas in ancient time they had for their Head-Magistrate, a Or Portgrave. Portreve, that is, a Governour of the City, King Richard the First ordained two Bal∣lives: in stead of whom soone after King John granted them liberty, to chuse by their voices yearely out of the twelve principall Companies a Major for their chiefe Ma∣gistrate: Praetor or Major. also two Sheriffes, whereof the one is called the Kings, the other the Cities Sheriffe. 1411. This forme of Common wealth being thus established it is incredible to tell how much London grew, 1405. and groweth still in publike and also private buildings, whiles all the Cities of England besides decrease. For, to say nothing of that beau∣tifull peece of worke, the Senat house named Guild Hall, built by Sir Thomas Knowles Major: Leaden Hall, a large and goodly building, erected by Simon Eire, to bee a common Garner in time of dearth to pull downe the price of Corne; The Burse. the Merchants meeting place standing upon Pillars, 1567. which the common people call the Burse, and Queene Elizabeth with a solemne ceremony named The Royall Exchange, Royall Ex∣change. for the use of Merchants, and an ornament to the City, set up by Sir Thomas Gresham Citizen and knight; a magnificent worke verily, whether you respect the modull of the building, the resort of Merchants from all Nations th ther, or the store of wares there. Which Sir Thomas Gresham, being withall an exceeding great lover of lear∣ning, consecrated a most spacious house his owne habitation to the furtherance of learning, Grehams College. and instituted there Professours of Divinity, Law, Physicke, Astronomy, Geometry, and Musicke, with liberall salaries and stipends: to the end that London might be a place not onely furnished with all sorts of Traffique, but also with the li∣berall Arts and Sciences. To passe over the House of the Society of the House, com∣monly called the Stilyard, as the Easterlings yard, and the waters conveighed by pipes under the ground, into all parts of the City, and very goodly conducts or cisternes ca∣stellated to receive the same: also the new conveyance of water devised by the skil∣full travell of Peer Maurice a German; who by meanes of a forcer or wheele, with pipes placed at a certaine levell, brought water of late out of the Tamis into a great part of the City; To omit all these, I say, it is so adorned every where with Chur∣ches, that RELIGION and GODLINESSE seem to have made choise of their residence herein. For the Churches therein amount to the number of one hundred twenty and one, more verily than Rom it selfe (as great and holy as it is) can shew. Besides Hospitals for diseased persons, it maintaineth also sixe hundred Orphane children or thereabout, in Christs Church Hospitall, and poore people upon contribution of Almes about 1240. &c. A long time it would aske to discourse particularly of the good lawes and orders, of the laudable government, of the port and dignity of the Major and Aldermen, of their forward service and loyalty to their Prince, of the Citizens courtesie, the faire building and costly furniture, the breed of excellent and choise wits, their gardens in the Suburbs full of dainty arbours, and banqueting roomes, stored also with strange herbes from forraigne countries, of the multitude, strength and furni∣ture of their ships, the incredible store of all sorts of Merchandise (two hundred thou∣sand broad-clothes, Guicciardin. beside other An werp alone hath received from hence every yeare) and of the superabundance of all things which belong to the furniture or neces∣sity of mans life. For, right truly wrote that Hadrianus Iunius in his Philippeis: —Tecti opibúsque refertum Londinum, & si fas, numeroso cive superbum, Larga ubi foecundo rerum undat copia cornu. Thicke built with houses London is, with riches stuffed full, Proud, (if we may so say) of men that therein live and dwell, Wherein most plenteous wise abound all things that tongue can tell. And Iul. Scaliger in his Poem of Cities. Vrbs animis, numeróque potens, & r bore genti . For peoples, courage, numbers, power, it is a City strong. And another Poet hath powred out these Verses also, concerning London, if you deigne to reade them, LONDINUM gemino procurrit littore longè Aemula materna tollens sua lumina Troia Clementer surgente jugo dum te dit in ortum: Urbs peramaena situ, coelóque solóque beata. Urbs pietate potens, numeroso cive superba, Urbsque Britannorum quae digna BRITANNIA dici. Haec nova doctrinis Lutetia, mercibus Ormus, Altera Roma viris, Chrysaea secunda metallis. Along both bankes out stretched farre the Citie LONDON lies Resembling much her mother Troie, aloft she lifts her eies, Whiles on a gentle rising hill she beareth toward East: A City pleasant for her site, in aire, and soile much blest. Religious, and populous: and hence she lookes on hie, And well deserves for to be cal'd the Britans Britanie. For learning new Lutetia, Ormus for Traffique mich, A second Rome for valiant men, Chrysae for metals rich. In this manner likewise versified Henry of Huntingdon in praise of London, while King Stephen raigned, about foure hundered yeares since: Ibis & in nostros dives Londonia versus, Quae nos immemores non sinis esse tui. Quando tuas arces, tua moenia mente retracto, Quae vidi, videor cuncta videre mihi. Fama loquax & nat a loqui, moritura silendo, Laudibus crubait fingere falsa tuis. Thou also shalt of Verses ours Rich London have thy part, For why? we cannot thee forget, so great is thy desart. When I thinke of thy stately Towres, thy faire and spacious Wall Which I have seene, me thinkes therewith I see no * lesse then all. This pratling fame, that's borne to prate, and talk'd she not would dye, In all the praise that goes of thee hath bash'd to tell one lye. Another Poet in like manner pleasantly played upon London in this sort: Hac Urbs illa potens, cui tres tria dona ministrant Bacchus, Apollo, Ceres, pocula, carmen, ador. Hac Urbs illa potens, quam Iuno, Minerva, Diana Mercibus, arce, feris, ditat, adornat, alit. This is that City strong to which three gifts are given by three, By Bacchus, Ceres, and Phoebus, Wine, Wheat, and Poetree. This place sterne Pallas, Iuno Queene, Diana Hunters-feer Adorn's, enricheth, and doth feed, with towres, with wares, with deer. But in a more grave note and serious stile, a friend of mine and a praise worthy per∣son, Master Iohn Ionston, Professor of Divinity in the Kings University of S. Andrewes. URBS AUGUSTA, cui coelúmque, solúmque, salúmque Cuíque favent cunctis cuncta elementa bonis. Mitius haud usquàm coelum est, uberrima Tellus Fundit inexhausti germina laeta soli. Et pater Oceanus Tamisino gurgite mistus, Convehit immensas totius orbis opes. Regali cultu; sedes clarissima Regum Gentis praesidium, cor, anima, atque oculus. Gens antiqua, potens virtute & robore belli, Artium & omnigenûm nobilitata opibus. Singula contemplare animo, attentúsque tuere, Aut Orbem aut Orbis dixeris esse caput. This City well AUGUSTA call'd, to which (a truth to say) Aire, Land, Sea, and all Elements, shew favour every way. The weather no where milder is, the ground most rich to see, Doth yeeld all fruits of fertile soile, that never spent will bee. And Ocean, that with Tams streame his flowing tyde doth blend Conveis to it commodities, all that the world can send. The noble seat of Kings it is for port and roialty, Of all the Realme the fence, the heart, the life, and lightsome ey. The people ancient, valorous, expert in chivalry, Enriched with all sorts and meanes of Art and mysterie. Take heedfull view of every thing, and then say thus in briefe, This either is a world it selfe, or of the world the chiefe. But of these and such like particulars Iohn Stowe Citizen of London, and a famous Chronicler hath discoursed more at large, and more exactly in that his Survey of London, which he lately published. Now will I take my leave of my deere native Country, and bid London a diew, af∣ter I have given this onely note, that the Pole is here elevated fiftie one degrees, and foure and thirty scruples, and the Meridian distant from the farthest West-poynt three and twenty degrees and five and twenty scruples. That the Orpheus harpe a star. Fidicula symboli∣zing in nature with Venus and Mercurie, is the Tropick starre which glanceth upon the Horizon, but never setteth; and the Dragons head is reputed by Astronomers to be the Verticall starre over head. Or beyond Radcliffe. Isle of Dogs. From London, the Tamis watering Redcliff, so called of the Red-cliffe, a prety fine Towne and dwelling place of Sailers, as he fetcheth almost a round compasse with a great winding reach, taketh into him the River Lea at the east bound of this Coun∣tie, when it hath collected his divided streame and cherished fruitfull Marish-me∣dowes. Upon which there standeth nothing in this side worth the speaking of. For, neither Aedelmton hath ought to shew, Edmonton▪ Waltham Crosse. but the name derived of Nobility; nor Wal∣tham, unlesse it be the Crosse erected there for the funerall pompe of Queene Aeleo∣nor Wife to King Edward the First, whereof also it tooke name. Onely Enfeld a house of the Kings is here to be seene, built by Sir Thomas Lovel knight (of the or∣der of the Garter and one of King Henry the Seventh his Privy Counsell) and Du∣rance neighbour thereunto a house of the Wrothes of ancient name in this Countie. To Enfeld-house, Enfield Chase. Enfeld-chace is hard adjoyning, a place much renowned for hunting: the possession in times past of the Magnavils Earles of Essex, afterwards of the Bohuns who succeeded them: and now it belongeth to the Duchie of Lancaster, since the time that Henry the Fourth King of England espoused one of the daughters and coheires of Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford and Essex of that surname. And there are yet to be seene, in the middest well nere of this Chase, the rubbish and ruines of an old house, which the vulgar sort saith was the dwelling place of the Magnavils Earles of Essex. As for the title of Midlesex, the Kings of England have vouchsafed it to none, neither Duke, Marquis, Earle, or Baron. In this County, without the City of London, are reckoned Parishes much about 73. Within the City, Liberties, and Suburbes. 121. ESSEXIA COMITATVS. QVEM olim TRINOBANTES tenuerunt Continens in se opida marcatoria▪ xx. Pagos et Villas ccccxiiii. vna Cunt singulis hundredis et flu: minibus in odem ESSEX. T HE other part of the Trinobantes, toward the East called in the English Saxon tongue , and , in the Norman language Exssesa, of the situation toward the East, and the Saxons which inhabited it, and commonly Essex, is a Country large in compasse, fruitfull, full of Woods, plentifull of Saffron, and very wealthy: encircled, as it were, on the one side with the maine Sea, on the other with fishfull Rivers, which also doe affoord their peculiar commodities in great abundance. On the North side, the River Stour divideth it from Suffolke, on the East the Ocean windeth it selfe into it: On the South part, the Tamis being now growne great secludeth it from Kent like as in the West part the little River Ley from Midlesex, and Stort or Stour the lesse which runneth into it, from Hertford∣shire. In describing of this Country, according to my methode begunne, first I will speake of the memorable places by Ley and the Tamis, afterwards of those that bee further within, and upon the Sea-coast. By Ley, in the English Saxon Tongue , there stretcheth out a great way in length and breadth a Forest serving for game, stored very full with Deere, that for their bignesse, and fatnesse withall, have the name above all other. In times past called it was by way of excellency Foresta de Essex, Waltham Forest. now Waltham Forest, of the towne Waltham, in the Saxons speech , that ; A wilde or wooddy habitation. This standeth upon Ley, where, by dividing his Chanell hee maketh divers Eights or Islands, and is not of any great Antiquity to make boast of. For, when the King∣dome of the Saxons beganne to decay, one Tovie, a man of great wealth and au∣thority, as wee reade in the private History of the place, The Kings Staller, that is, Standerd bearer, for the abundance of wilde beasts there, first founded it, and planted three∣score and sixe indwellers therein. After his death Athelstane his sonne quickly made a hand of all his goods and great estate: and King Edward the Confessour gave this Towne to Harold Earle Goodwins sonne: Waltham Abbay. and streight wayes an Abbay was erected there, the worke and Tombe both of the said Harold. For, he being crept up by the errour of men and his owne ambition to regall Dignity built this Abbay in honour of an Holy Crosse found farre Westward, and brought hither, as they write, by mira∣cle. Heerein made he his prayers and vowes for victory when hee marched against Normans, and being soone after slaine by them, was by his mother, who had with most suppliant suite craved and obtained at the Conquerours hands his Corps, here entombed. Baron Deny. But now it hath a Baron, namely Sir Edward Deny, called lately unto that honour by King Iames his Writ. Over this Towne upon the rising of an Hill standeth Copthall, Copthall. and yeeldeth a great way off, a faire sight to seed mens eyes. This was the habitation in times past of Fitz-Aucher, and lately of Sir Thomas Heneage Knight, who made it a very goodly and beautifull house. Neere unto this River al∣so was seated, Durolitum. no doubt, DUROLITUM, a Towne of antique memory, which the Emperour Antonine maketh mention of, but in what place precisely, I am not a∣ble to shew. For, the ancient places of this County, (I tell you once for all before hand) lye hidden so enwrapped in obscurity, that I, who elsewhere could see some∣what, heerein, am heere more than dim-sighted. But if I may give my guesse, I would thinke that to have beene DUROLITUM, which retaining still some marke of the old name, is called at this day Leyton: that is, The Towne upon Ley, like as Durolitum in the British Tongue signifieth, The water Ley. A small Village it is in these daies, inhabited in scattering wise, five miles from London, for which five, through the carelesse negligence of transcribers is crept into Antonine xv. That there was a common passage heere in times past over the River, a place nigh unto it called Ouldfourd seemeth to proove, in which when Queene Mawd wife to King Henry the First hardly escaped danger of drowning, shee gave order that a little beneath, at Stretford, there should bee a Bridge made over the water. There, the River brancheth into three severall streames, and most pleasantly watereth on every side the greene medowes: wherein I saw the remaines of a little Monaste∣rie which William Montfichet, a Lord of great name of the Normans race built, in the yeere of our Lord 1140. and forthwith Ley gathering it selfe againe into one chanell mildely dischargeth it selfe in the Tamis, whereupon the place is called Leymouth. The Tamis which is mightily by this time encreased, doth violently carry away with him the streames of many waters, hath a sight (to speake onely of what is worth remembrance) of Berking, Berking. which Bede nameth Berecing, a Nunnery founded by Er∣kenwald Bishop of London, Roding the river. The Booke of Ely. where Roding a little River entreth into the Tamis. This running hard by many Villages imparteth his name unto them, as Heigh Roding, Ei∣thorp Roding, Leaden Roding, &c. of the which, Leofwin a Nobleman gave one or two in times past, to the Church of Ely, for to expiate and make satisfaction for the wicked act hee had committed in murdering his owne mother: Chipping Angre. then, by Angre, where upon a very high Hill are the tokens of a Castle built by Richard Lucy Lord Chiefe Justice of England in the Raigne of Henry the Second: of which Family, a daughter and one of the heires, Liber Inq. de Ripariu. King Iohn gave in marriage to Richard Rivers, who dwelt hard by at Stranford Rivers. * So it passeth by Lambourn Manour, which is held by service of the Wardstaffe, viz. to carry a load of strawe in a Carte with sixe horses, two ropes, two men in harnesse to watch the said Wardstaffe when it is brought to the Towne of Aibridge, &c. and then by Wansted Parke, where the late Earle of Leicester built much for his pleasure. From the mouth of this Roding, this Tamis hasteneth through a ground lying very flat and low, Marshes. and in most places otherwhiles overflowne, (whereby are occasioned strong and unwholsome vapours exceeding hurtfull to the health of the neighbour Inha∣bitants) to Tilbury: Holes cut out. neere unto which there bee certaine holes in the rising of a chalky Hill, sunke into the ground tenne sathome deepe, the mouth whereof is but narrow, made of stone cunningly wrought, but within they are large and spacious, in this forme, which hee that went downe into them described unto mee after this manner. Of which I have nothing else to say, but what I have delivered already. As for Tilbury, In Kent pag. 334. Tilbury. ( Bede nameth it Tilaburgh ) it consisteth of some few cottages by the Ta∣mis side, yet was it in ancient time the seate of Bishop Chad, when about the yeare of our Salvation 630. hee ingrafted the East-Saxons by Baptisme into the Church of Christ. Afterwards, this River passing by places lying flat and unwholesome, with a winding returne of his Water, Convennos th Isle. severeth the Island CONVENNON, which also is called COUNOS, (whereof Ptolomee maketh mention) from the firme land. Canvey. This hath not yet wholly foregone the old name, but is called Canvey. It lyeth against the Coast of Essex, from Leegh to Hole Haven, five miles in length: some part whereof appertaineth to the Collegiat Church of Westminster. But so low, that oftentimes it is quite overflowne, all save hillocks cast up, upon which the Sheepe have a place of safe refuge. For, it keepeth about foure hundred Sheepe, whose flesh is of a most sweet and delicate taste, which I have seene young lads ta∣king womens function, with stooles fastened to their buttockes to milke, yea and to make Cheeses of Ewes milke in those dairy sheddes of theirs, that they call there, Wiches. There adjoyne to this Island along in order, Beamfleot. first Beamfleot, fortified with deepe and wide Trenches (as saith Florilegus ) and with a Castle, by Hasting the Dane, which King Aelfred wonne from them: Then Hadleigh, sometime the Castle of Hubert de Burgo, afterwards of Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester, now defaced with ru∣ines: and in the last place Leegh, a proper fine little Towne and very full of stout and adventerous Sailers: with Pritlewel fast by where Sweno de Essex built long since a Cell for Monkes. And here the land shooteth forward to make a Promontory, which they call Black-taile Point, S. Shobery. and Shobery Nesse of Shobery a Village situate upon it; which sometime, was a City an Havenet named , For, in old Annales of the English-Saxons wee reade thus, Anno 894. The Danes being driven from Beamfleot, goe to a City seated in East-sex, called in the English Tongue Sceobirig, and there built themselves a sure and strong Fort. Heere by reason that the bankes on both sides shrinke backe, the Tamis at a huge and wide mouth rowleth into the sea. This doth Ptolomee terme Aestuarium TAMESAE, and corruptly in some other Copies TEMESAE, and we commonly, the Tamis Mouth. More inward is Rochford placed, Rochford. that hath given name to this Hundered: Now, it belongeth to the Barons Rich, but in old time it had Lords of ancient Nobility sir∣named thereof: whose inheritance came at length to Butler Earle of Ormond and Wiltshire, and from them to Sir Thomas Bullen, whom King Henry the Eighth crea∣ted Vicount Rochford, Lord Rochfo and afterward Earle of Wiltshire, out of whose Progeny sprung that most gracious Queene ELIZABETH, and the Barons of Hunsdon. Heere I have heard much speech of a Lawlesse Court (as they called it) holden in a strange manner about Michaelmasse, * in the first peepe of the day upon the first cocke crowing, Lawlesse Court. in a silent sort; yet with shrowde fines eftsoones redoubled, if not answered, which servile attendance, they say was imposed upon certaine Tenants there-about for conspiring there at such unseasonable time, to raise a commotion. But I leave this knowing neither the originall, nor the certaine forme thereof. One∣ly I heard certaine obscure barbarous rhymes of it. Curia de Domino Rege tenetur sin lege. Ante ortum solis, luceat, nisi polus, &c. not worth remembring. Leaving the Tamis Banke, and going farther within the countrey, yea from West to East, these places of name above the rest standing thus in order shew them∣selves. Havering an ancient retiring place of the Kings, Havering. so called of a Ring, which in that place a Pilgrime delivered as sent from S. J. Baptist (for so they write) unto K. Edward the Confessor: Horn-Church, named in times past Cornutum Monasterium, that is, the horned Minster, for there shoot out at the East end of the Church certaine points of leade fashioned like hornes: Rumford. See the the An∣nalles. Rumford, the glory whereof dependeth of a swine mercat; and Giddy-hall, an house adjoyning to it, which belonged to that Sir Thomas Cooke Major of London, whose great riches hoorded up together wrought him his greatest danger. For, being judicially arraigned▪ (innocent man as he was) of high treason, and through the incorrupt equity of Judge Markham acquit in a most dangerous time, yet was he put to a very grievous fine, Brent-wood. and stript in manner of all that he was worth: Brentwood called by the Normans Bois arse, in the same sense, and by that name King Stephen granted a Mercat and a Faire there, to the Abbat of S. Osith ; and many yeares after Isabell Countesse of Bedford daughter to King Edward the Third built a Chappell to the memory of S. Thomas of Canterbury, for the ease of the Inhabitants: Enger∣stone a Towne of note for nothing else but the Mercat and Innes for Travailers. Heere am I at a stand, and am halfe in a doubt whether I should now slip as an abortive fruite that conjecture, which my minde hath travailed with. Considering there hath beene in this Tract the City CAESAROMAGUS, Caesaromagus called in the Itinerary table Baromagus. and the same doubtlesse in the Romanes time of especiall note, and importance; for, the very name, if there were nothing else, may evict so much, signifying as it doth Caesars City, as DRUSO∣MAGUS the City of Drusus, which also should seeme to have beene built in the ho∣nour of Caesar Augustus. For, Suaetonius writeth thus, Kings, that were in amity and league, founded every one in his owne Kingdome Cities named Caesareae in honour of Au∣gustus. What if I should say that CAESAROMAGUS did stand neere unto Brent∣wood, would not a learned Reader laugh at me, as one Soothsayer doth when he spi∣eth another? Certes, no ground I have nor reason to strengthen this my conjecture from the distance thereof, seeing the numbers of the miles in Antonine be most cor∣ruptly put downe, which neverthelesse agree well enough with the distance from COLONIA and CANONIUM. Neither can I helpe my selfe with any proofe by the si∣tuation of it upon the Roman high-way, which in this enclosed country is no where to be seene. Neither verily there remaineth heere so much as a shadow or any twinkling shew of the name CAESAROMAGUS, unlesse it be (and that is but very sclender) in the name of an Hundred, which of old time was called Ceasford, and now Cheasford Hundred. Surely, as in some ancient Cities the names are a little altered, and in others cleane changed: so there be againe, wherein one syllable or twaine at most bee remaining: thus CAESARAUGUSTA in Spaine is now altered to be Sa∣ragosa: CAESAROMAGUS in France, hath lost the name cleane and is called Bea∣vois, and CAESAREA in Normandy, now Cherburg, hath but one syllable left of it. But what meane I thus to trifle, and to dwell in this point? If in this quarter here∣by, there bee not CAESAROMAGUS, let others seeke after it for me: It passeth my wit, I assure you, to finde it out, although I have diligently laid for to meet with it with net, and toile both of eares and eies. South-Okin∣don. Bruin. Beneath Brentwood I saw South-Okindon: where dwelt the Bruins a Family as fa∣mous as any one in this Tract: out of the two heires female whereof, being many times married to sundry husbands, Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, the Tirels, Berners, Harlestones, Heveninghams and others descended. And of that house there be males yet remaining in South-hampton-shire. Also, Thorndon, where Sir John Petre Knight raised a goodly faire house, Thorndon. Baron Petre. who now was by our Soveraigne King James created Baron Petre of Writtle. That Thorndon was in times past the dwelling place of a worshipfull Family of Fitzlewis: the last of which name if we may beleeve the common report, by occasion that the house happened to be set on fire in the time of his wedding feast, was pittiously himselfe therein burnt to death▪ Burghsted, and more short Bursted, that is, the place of a Burgh, which name our forefathers used to give unto many places that were of greater antiquity. This I once supposed to have been CAESAROMAGUS: and what ever it was in old time, it is at this day but a good country Towne neere unto Byliricay, a Mercat towne of very good resort. Likewise Ashdowne, Ashdowne. sometimes Assandun, that is, as Marian interpreteth it, the Mount of Asses, where long since a bloudy battaile was fought, in which King Edmund sirnamed Ironside had at the beginning a good hand of the Danes and put them to rout, but streight waies the fortune of the field turning about, he was so defeited that he lost a great number of the English Nobility. In memoriall of which battaile we reade that King Canutus the Dane built a Church afterward in that place, what time as upon remorse and repentance for the bloud that he had shed, hee erected Chappels in what part soever he had fought any field, and shed Christian bloud. Not farre from these, is Ralegh, a prety proper towne: and it seemeth to be Raganeia in Domesday booke, wherein is mention made of a Castle that Suenus heere built, in which also we read thus: There is one Parke and sixe Arpennes of Vineyard, and it yeeldeth twenty Modij of wine if it take well. Which I note the rather, both for the French word Arpenn and also for the wine made in this Isle. Arpen. Wine. Radulphus de Dicero. The family of the Essex. This Suenus was a man of great name and of noble birth, the sonne of Robert, sonne of Wiwarc, but father to Robert of Essex: whose son was that Sir Robert de Essex, who in right of inheritance was the Kings Standard bearer, and who for that in a light skirmish against the Welsh, hee had not onely cast off his courage, but also cast away his Standard; being chalenged for treason, vanquished in duell, or combat, and thereof thrust into a Cloystre, forfeited a goodly patrimony, and livelod, which was confiscate to King Henry the Second, and helped to fill his Coffers. As for the Barony, it lay dead from that time a great while in the Kings hands, untill Sir Hubert de Burgh obtained it of King John. Above this the shores retiring backe by little and little admit two creekes of the Ocean entring within them: the one, the neighbour inhabitants call Crouch, the o∣ther Blackwater (which in old time was named Pant. ) In the said Crouch, by reason of the waters division, there lie scattered foure Islands carrying a pleasant greene hew, but by occasion of inundations, growne to be morish and fenny, among which these two bee of greatest name, Wallot and Foulenesse: that is, The Promontory of Fowles, which hath a Church also in it: and when the sea is at the lowest ebbe, a man may ride over to it. Dengy hun∣dred. Betweene these Creekes lieth Dengy Hundred, in ancient times Daun∣cing, passing plentifull in grasse, and rich in Cattaile, but Sheepe especially where all their doing is in making of Cheese: Essex cheese. and there shall ye have men take the womens office in hand and milke Ewes: whence those huge thicke Cheeses are made that are vented and sould not onely into all parts of England, but into forraigne nations also, for the rusticall people, labourers, and handicraftes men to fill their bellies, and feed upon. The chiefe Towne heereof at this day is Dengy ; so called as the Inhabitants are perswaded, of the Danes, who gave name unto the whole Hundred: Neere un∣to which is Tillingham, given by Ethelbert the first Christian King of the English-Sa∣xons, unto the Church of Saint Paul in London: and higher up to the North shore, flourished sometimes a City of ancient Record, which our forefathers called Ithan∣cestre. For, Ralph Niger writeth thus out of S. Bede. Bishop Chad baptized the East-Saxons neere to Maldon in the City of Ithancestre, that stood upon the banke of the River Pant, which runneth hard by Maldon, in Dengy Province; but now is that City drowned in the River Pant. To point out the place precisely I am not able, but I nothing doubt that the River called Froshwell at this day, was heeretofore named Pant: seeing that one of the Springs thereof is called Pantswell, and the Monkes of Coggeshall, so ter∣med it. Doubtlesse, this Ithancester was situate upon the utmost Promontory of this Dengy Hundred, where in these daies standeth Saint Peters upon the wall. For, a∣long this shore much a doe have the inhabitants to defend their grounds with forced bankes or walls against the violence of the Ocean, ready to inrush upon them. And I my selfe am partly of this minde, that this Ithancester was that OTHONA where a Band of the Fortenses with their Captaine, in the declination of the Romane Em∣pire, kept their station or Guard under the Comes or Lieutenant of the Saxon-shore, against the depredations of the Saxon Rovers: For the altering of OTHONA to ITHANA, is no hard straining: and the situation thereof upon a Creeke into which many Rivers are discharged, was for this purpose very fit and commodious, and yet heere remaineth a huge ruine of a thicke Wall, whereby many Romane Coines have beene found. It seemeth not amisse to set downe, how King Edward the Confessour graunted by a briefe Charter the keeping of this Hundred to Ranulph The Normans call him Peve∣rell. Peperking, which I will willingly heere annex, to the end that wee, who sift every pricke and accent of the law, may see the upright simplicity and plaine dealing of that age. And thus goeth the tenour of it, as it was taken forth of the Kings Records in the Exchequer, but by often exemplifying and copying it out, some words are mollified and made more familiar. Iche Edward Koning In the Records Saint Hilary terme E. 2.17. in the keeping of the Treasu∣rer and Cham∣berlaine of the Exchequer. Have given of my Forrest the keeping. Of the Hundred of Chelmer and Dancing, To Randolph Peperking and to his kindling: With heorte and hinde, doe and bocke, Hare and Foxe, Cat and Brocke, Wild Fowell with his flocke, Partrich, Fesant hen, and Fesant cocke: With green and wilde stob and stocke. To kepen and to yemen by all her might, Both by day and eke by night: And Hounds for to hold Good and swift and bolde: Four Greahounds and six racches, For Hare and Foxe, and wild Cattes. And therefore ich made him my booke: Witnesse the Bishop Wolston And booke ylered many on, And Swein of Essex our Brother And teken him many other, And our Stiward Howelin That by sought me for him. This was, the plaine dealing, trueth, and simplicity of that age, which used to make all their assurances whatsoever, in a few lines, and with a few gilt Crosses. For, before the comming in of the Normans, as wee read in Ingulphus, writings Ob∣ligatory were made firme with golden Crosses and other small signes or markes: but the Nor∣mans began the making of such Bils and Obligations, Seales or sig∣nets first taken up among Eng∣lishmen. with a Print or Seale in wax, set to with every ones speciall Signet under the expresse entituling of three or foure Witnesses. Before time many houses and land thereto passed by grant and bargaine without script, Charter, or Deede onely with the Landlords sword or helmet, with his horne or cup. Yea and many Tenements were demised with a spurre, or horse-cury-combe, with a bowe, and some with an arrow. In the Creeke of Blackwater, which as I said, closeth the North side of this Hun∣dred, and is stored with those dainty Oysters, which wee call Walfleot Oysters, their run two Rivers that water a great part of the Shire, Chelmer and Froshwell. The River Chelmer flowing out of the inner part of the country which is woody, runneth downe first by Thaxted a little Mercate Towne seated very pleasantly upon an high rising hill; also by Tiltey, where Maurice Fitz-Gilbert founded in times past a small Abbay, unto Estanues ad Turrim, now Eston, which noble Gentleman sirnamed De Lovaine inhabited, as descended from Godfrey of Lovaine brother to Henry the Sixth of that name Duke of Brabant, who being sent hither to keepe the Honor of Eye, his posterity flourished among the Peeres of this Realme to the time of King Edward the Third, when the heire generall was married into the house of Bourchier. Thence it glideth downe to Dunmow, of old time called Dunmawg, and in the Tax booke of England Dunmaw, a Towne pleasantly situate upon an hill with a prety gentle fall. Where, one Juga founded a Priory in the yeare 1111. But William Bai∣nard, of whom Juga held (thus we finde it written in the private history of this Church) the Village of little Dunmow, by felony lost his Barony, and King Henry the First gave it to Robert the sonne of Richard, sonne to Gislebert Earle of Clare, and to his heires, with the honour of Bainards Castle in London: which Robert at that time was King Henries Sewar. These be the very words of the Author: neither doe I thinke it lawfull for me to alter or reforme them otherwise than they are, although there be in them some , that is, a putting or mistaking of one time for another, a thing that we meet with otherwhiles in the best Historiographers. For, there had not beene, as then any Earle of Clare in the family of Clare. Now let us for a while digresse and goe aside a little on either hand from the Ri∣ver. Not farre from hence is Plaisy seated, so called in French of Pleasing, in times past, named Estre, the habitation both in the last yeeres of the English Saxons, and also afterwards, of the great Constables of England, as witnesseth Ely booke. At this towne the first William Mandevill Earle of Essex beganne a Castle, and two Princes of great authority, Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester and Earle of Essex who foun∣ded heere a College, and Iohn Holland Earle of Huntingdon brother to King Richard the Second by the mothers side, deprived of lost honorable title of Duke of Excester, when they could not keepe a meane betweene froward stubbernesse and servile ob∣sequiousnesse, found thence their subversion. For Thomas, upon his rash and head∣strong contumacy was on a sudden violently carryed from hence to Calice and there smothered: and John, for a seditious conspiracy was beheaded in this place by King Henry the Fourth, that hee might seeme to have beene justly punished by way of satisfaction for the said Thomas of Woodstocke, of whose death hee was thought to bee the principall practiser, and procurer. From thence passeth Chelmer downe not farre from Leez, a little Abbay of old time founded by the Gernons, which at this day is the chiefe seat of the Barons Rich, Barons Rich. who acknowledge themselves for this digni∣ty beholden to Richard Rich a most wise and judicious person; Lord Chancellor of England under King Edward the Sixth, who in the first yeere of his raigne created him Baron Rich. A little beneath, standeth Hatfield Peverell, so denominated of Ran∣dulph Peverell the owner thereof, who had to wife a Lady of incomparable beauty, in those daies; the daughter of Ingelricke a man of great nobility among the English-Saxons: This Lady founded heere a College, which now is in manner quite plucked downe, The Booke of Saint Martins in London. and in a window of the Church, whereof there remaineth still a small part, lyeth entombed. She bare unto her husband William Peverell Castellane of Dover, Sir Payne Peverell Lord of Brun in the County of Cambridge: and unto King William the Conquerour whose Paramore shee was, William Peverell Lord of Nottingham. But now returne we to Chelmer, which by this time speedeth it selfe to Chelmerford com∣monly Chensford (where, by the distance of the place from CAMALODUNUM, it may seeme that old CANONIUM sometimes stood). Canonium. This is a good bigge Towne situate in the heart of the Shire betweene two Rivers, who as it were, a∣greed heere to joyne both their streames together: to wit Chelmer from the East, and another from the South, the name whereof if it be Can, as some would have it, we have no reason to doubt, that this was CANONIUM. Famous it was within the remembrance of our fathers in regard of a small religi∣ous house built by Malcome King of Scots, now of note onely for the Assises (for so they call those Courts of Iustice wherein twice a yeere the causes and controversies of the whole County are debated before the Judges.) It beganne to flourish, when Maurice Bishop of London, unto whom it belonged, built the Bridges heere in the Raigne of Henry the First, and turned London way thither, which lay before through Writtle, a Towne right well knowne for the largenesse of the Parish: which, King Henry the Third granted unto Robert Brus Lord of Anandale in Scotland: (whose wife was one of the heires of Iohn sirnamed Scot, the last Earle of Chester) for that hee would not have the Earldome of Chester to bee divided among the di∣staves: and King Edward the Third, when as the posterity of the Bruses forsooke their allegeance, bestowed it upon Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford and of Essex. But now of late, when King Iames at his entrance to the Kingdome bestowed Baro∣nies bountifully upon select persons, hee created Sir Iohn Petre a right respective Knight, Baron Petre of Writtle. Whose father Sir William Petre a man of approoved wisdome and exquisite learning, memorable not so much for those most honourable places and offices of State which hee bare, (as who was of the Privie Counsell to King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, Queene Mary, and Queene Eliza∣beth, and sent oftentimes in Embassage to forreigne Princes) as for that being bred and brought up in good learning, he well deserved of learning in the University of Oxford, and was both pitifull and bounteous to his poore neighbours about him, and at Egerstone, where he lyeth buryed. Frosh-well the River, more truely called Pant, and neere to his mouth, Black-water issuing out of a small spring about Radwinter that belonged to the Barons of Cobham, after it hath gone a long course and seene nothing but Bocking a fat Parsonage, it commeth to Cogeshall, a Mercate Towne, well knowne in times past for a Priory of Cluniacke Monkes built by King Stephen, and the habitation of ancient Knights thence sirnamed De Cogeshall, Cogeshall. from whose heire generall marryed into the old fa∣mily of Tirell, Tirell. there branched farre a faire propagation of the Tirells in this shire and elsewhere. Easterford. Whitham. Then goeth on this water by Easterford, some call it East-Sturford: and leaving some mile of Whitham a faire through-faire and built by King Edward the elder, in the yeere 914. which also afterward was of the Honour of Eustace Earle of Bollen ; meeteth at length with Chelmer. Which now passing on whole in one chanell not farre from Danbury mounted upon an high Hill, the habitation for a time of the family of the Darcies, runneth hard by Woodham-walters, the ancient seate of the Lords Fitz-Walters: who being nobly descended were of a most an∣cient race, derived from Robert the younger sonne of Richard sonne to Earle Gisle∣bert: but in the age more lately foregoing, translated by a daughter into the stocke of the Ratcliffes, who being advanced to the Earledome of Sussex dwell now a little from hence in New Hall, a stately and sumptuous house. This New Hall appertained sometime to the Butlers Earles of Ormond, and then hereditarily to Sir Thomas Bol∣len Earle of Wiltshire, of whom King Henry the Eighth getting it by way of Ex∣change, enlarged it to his exceeding great charges, and called it by a new name Beau∣lieu, which for all that was never currant among the people. After this, Chelmer with other waters running with him, being divided by a River-Island, casting off that name, and now being called of some Blacke-water and of others Pant, saluteth that ancient Colony of the Romanes CAMALODUNUM, Camalodunum. which many hundred yeeres since adorned this shore. Ptolomee tearmeth it CAMUDOLANUM, An∣tonine CAMULODUNUM and CAMOLUDUNUM: But, Pliny, Dio, and an old marble stone, induce us to beleeve that CAMALODUNUM is the right name. In the seeking out of this City, good God, how dim-sighted have some been? whereas it bewraied it selfe by the very name and situation; and shewed it selfe cleerely to them that are halfe blinde: A number have searched for it in the West part of this Isle, as that good man, who thought himselfe to carry, as one would say, the Sunne of Antiquity in his owne hand: others in the furthest part of Scot∣land: others wholly addicted in opinion to Leland affirmed it to bee Colchester: when as (the name scarce any whit maimed) it is called at this day, in stead of CA∣MALODUNUM, Maldon, Maldon. in the Saxon Tongue , and , the greater part of the word remaining yet entire and in use. Neither hath the expresse remaine of the name onely perswaded me to this, but also the distance set downe in Pliny from Mona, and the very situation in the ancient Itinerary Table doe affoord a most evident proofe thereof. That this name was imposed upon CAMALO∣DUNUM, of the God CAMULUS, I hardly dare imagine. Howbeit that Mars was worshipped under this name Camulus, both an old stone at Rome in the house of Collotians, and Altars discovered with this Inscription CAMULO DEO SAN∣CTO ET FORTISSIMO, Camulus a God. that is, TO CAMULUS THE HOLY AND MOST MIGHTY GOD, doe joyntly proove. And in an antique Coine of Cu∣nobellinus, whose royall Palace this was, (as I have already said) I have seene the por∣traict stamped of an head having an helmet on it, also with a speare, which may seeme to be that of Mars, with these letters, CAMV. But seeing this peece of money is not now ready at hand to shew, I exhibite here unto you other expresse portraicts of Cuno∣bellinus his peeces, which may be thought to have reference to this Camalodunum. This Cunobelin governed this East part of the Isle in the time of Tiberius the Em∣perour, and seemeth to have had three sonnes, Admimus, Togodumnus, and Cata∣cratus. Admimus by his father banished, was entertained by Caius Caligula the Empe∣rour what time as he made his ridiculous expedition into Batavia, that from thence he might blow, and breath out the terrour of his owne person over into Britaine. As for Togodumnus, Aulus Plautius in a set battaile defeited and slew him, and over Cata∣cratus, whom, as I said, he discomfited and put to flight, hee rode ovant in pety tri∣umph. This is that Plautius, who at the perswasion of C. Bericus, the Britaine a bani∣shed man (for there never want quarels one or other of Warre) was the first after Iulius Caesar that attempted Britaine under Claudius : Claudius in Britannia. whom Claudius himselfe, ha∣ving shipped over the Legions, followed in person with the whole power of the Empire, and with Elephants (the bones of which beasts being found, have deceived very many) hee passed over the Tamis and put to flight the Britans, who upon the banke received and encountred him as he came toward them; and wonne with ease this Camalodunum the Kings seat. For which exploit after hee had named his sonne BRITANNICUS, and beene himselfe oftentimes saluted Imperator, within sixe moneths after he set first forth in his voyage, returned to Rome. But heereof have I have written before more at large, neither list I to iterate the same in this place. When Camalodunum was thus brought under the Romanes subjection, Claudius planted a Colony there with a strong Band of old tried Souldiers, and in memoriall heereof ordained peeces of money to bee stamped with this Inscription: COL. CAMALODUN. Out of which it is gathered, that this happened in the XII. yeere of his Empire, and in the yeere 52. after the Birth of Christ. And in regard of those old experienced souldiers of the fourteenth Legion called Gemina Martia Vi∣ctrix, whom Tacitus tearmeth the Subduers of Britaine, brought thither and placed in it, it was named COLONIA VICTRICENSIS, and the Inhabitants Cives Roma∣ni, that is, Citizens of Rome, in an old Inscription, which I heere present to you. CN. MUNATIUS. M. F. PAL. AURELIUS BASSUS PROC. AUG. PRAEF. FABR. RRAEF. COH. III. SAGITTARIORUM, PRAEF. COH. ITERUM II. ASTURUM, CENSITOR CIVIUM ROMA∣NORUM COLONIAE VICTRI∣CENSIS QUAE EST IN BRI∣TANNIA CAMALODUNI, &c. A Colony (if it may be materiall to know so much) is A Company of men that be all brought into one certaine place, Servius. built with houses to their hands, which they are to have and hold by a certaine right. For the most part, old souldiers that had served long, were brought to such a place, both that themselves might be provided for, and maintained, and also be ready in all extremity to helpe against Rebels, and enforme withall the Provincials in their duties by law required. These Colonies also were of great estimation, as being pety resemblances and images, as it were, of the City of Rome. Moreover they had their peculiar Magistrates both superior and inferior: Of which because others have written sufficiently, I neede not to stand either upon them, or such like points. In this first Colony that the Romanes planted in Britaine, there was a Temple built unto Deified. The Altar and Temple of Claudius. Divus Claudius, Tacitus tearmeth it, The Altar of eter∣nall dominion, Whereof Seneca maketh mention in his Play, after this manner. A small matter it is, saith hee, and not sufficient, that Claudius hath a Temple in Britaine which the Barbarous Nation adoreth, and prayeth unto, as to a God. There were Priests also ele∣cted in honour of him, by name Sodales Augustales, which under a shew of Religion lavishly consumed the Britans goods. But after ten yeeres, fortune turned her wheele and downe went this Colony. For, when those old souldiers brought into these terri∣tories which they had won, exercised extreame cruelty upon these silly people, the burning broiles of Warre which before were quenched brake out into flames, with greater flashes. The Britans under the leading of Bunduica, who also is called B o∣dicia, by maine force sacked and set on fire this Colony, lying unfortified and without all fence, and within two daies wonne the said Temple whereinto the souldiers had thronged themselves. The Ninth Legion comming to aide they put to flight, and in one word slew of Roman Citizens and associates together threescore and tenne thousand. Dio saith, foure∣score thousand. This slaughter was foretold by many Prodigies. The Image of Victory in this City was turned backeward and fallen downe: In their Senate house strange noises were heard▪ The Theater resounded with howlings and yellings: Houses were seene under the water of Tamis, and the Arme of the sea beneath it overflowed the bankes as red as blood to see to, which now (for what cause I know not) wee call Blacke water, Idumanu . like as Ptolomee termed it IDUMANUM aestuarium, under which is cou∣ched a signification of Blacknesse: for, Yd , in the British tongue soundeth as much as Blacke. Yet, out of the very embers, the Romans raised it againe: For, Antonine the Emperour made mention of it many yeeres after. Howbeit in the English Saxons government it is scarce mentioned: Onely Marianus hath written, that Edward the sonne of Aelfred repaired Maldun when it was sore shaken by the furious rage of the Danes, and then fortified it with a Castle. William the Norman, Conquerour of England, as we reade in his Domesday. Commentary, had in this Towne 180 houses in the tenure and occupation of Burgesses, and 18. Mansions wasted. But at this day, for the number of the Inhabitants, and the bignesse, it is worthily counted one of the principall Townes in all Essex, and in Records named, The Burgh of Maldon. It is a Haven commodious enough, and for the bignesse very well inhabited, be∣ing but one especiall street descending much about a mile in length. Upon the ridge of an hill answerable to the termination of Dunum which signified an hilly, and high situation, wherein I saw nothing memorable, unlesse I should mention two silly Churches, a desolate place of White Friers, and a small pile of Bricke built not long since by R. Darcy, which name hath beene respective heereabout. Hence passing downe over the brackish water divided into two streamlets, by Highbridge, I sought for an ancient place which Antonine the Emperour placed sixe miles from Camalodunum, in the way toward Suffolke, and called it AD ANSAM. This I have thought to have beene some Bound belonging to the Colony of Ca∣malodunum, which resembled the fashion of Ansa, The bounds of Colonies. that is, The handle or eare of a pot. For, I had read in Siculus Flaccus, The Territories lying to Colonies were limited with divers and sundry markes: In the limits there were set up for bound-markes heere one thing, and there another: in one place little Images, in another long earthen Vessels: heere you should have little sword blades, three square stones or Lozenges pointed, and elsewhere ac∣cording to Vitalis and Arcadius, they were mere stones like flagons and small wine pipes: why might not therefore a stone fashioned like the handle of a pot bee set for a bound? Seeing that Antony according to his wonted manner called it Ad Ansam, and not Ansae? But how religiously and with what ceremoniall complements, these bound-markes were in old time set, I will by way of digression set downe heere out of the same Siculus Flaccus. When they were to place their bound markes, the very stones themselves they did set upon the firme ground, hard by those places wherein they ment to pitch them fast, in pittes or holes digged for the purpose, they annointed them and with vailes and garlands bedecked them. This done, in those pits wherein they were to put them, after sacrifice made, and an unspotted beast killed, upon burning firebrands covered over in the grave, they dropped in bloud, and thereupon they threw Frankincense and corne, Hony combes also and wine with other things, as the manner is to sacrifice unto gods of bounds and limits, they threw after the rest into the said pit. Thus when all these Viands were consumed with fire, they pitched the foresaid bound markes upon the hot ashes thereof, and so with carefull diligence fastened them strongly, and rammed them round about with fragments of stones, that they might stand the surer. But in what place soever this Ad Ansam was, I betake my selfe againe to my former opinion for the signification of the word: namely, that Ad Ansam was either a bound marke, or onely, a resting place or some Inne by the high way side under such a signe: and that I collect by the distance to have beene neere unto Cogeshall. Neither were they any things else but bound markes or Innes, that in the Romane age were named after the same forme of speech, Cogeshall. Ad Columnam, Ad Fines, Ad tres Tabernas, Ad Rotam, Ad septem Fratres, Ad Aquilam minorem, Ad Herculem, &c. that is, At the Pillar, At the Bounds, At the three Taverns, At the Wheele, At the seven Brethren, At the lesse Aegle, At Hercules, &c. And therefore to search more curiously into these matters, were nothing else but to hunt after the windes. Yet I will heere impart what I incidently happened up∣on in a private note, while I was inquisitive heereabout for Ad Ansam. In a place called Westfield three quarters of a mile distant from Cogeshall and belonging to the Abbay there, was found by touching of a plough a great brasen Pot. The Ploughmen supposing it to have beene hid treasure, sent for the Abbot of Cogeshall to see the taking up of it; and hee going thither met with Sir Clement Harleston, and desired him also to accompany him thither. The mouth of the Pot was closed with a white substance like paste or clay, as hard as burned bricke, when that by force was removed, there was found within it another Pot but that was of earth; that being opened there was found in it a lesser Pot of earth of the quantity of a Gollon covered with a matter like Velvet, and fastened at the mouth with a silke-lace. In it they found some whole bones and many peeces of small bones wrapped up in fine silke of fresh colour, which the Abbot tooke for the Reliques of some Saints, and layed up in his Vestuary. But this by way of digression, leaving it to your consideration. From Malden the Shores drawne backe intertaine the Sea in a most large and pleasant Bay, which yeeldeth exceeding great store of those Oysters of the best kinde, which we call Walfleot. And (that our Coasts should not be defrauded of their due fame and glory) I take these to bee those very Shores, which, as Pliny saith, ser∣ved the Romanes Kitchins: seeing that Mutianus giveth unto British Oysters the third place after those of Cizicum, in these very words of his: The Oysters of Cizi∣cum be greater than those that come from Lucrinum, and sweeter than they of Britaine. But neither at that time, nor afterwards, when Sergius Orata brought those Lu∣crine Oysters into such name and great request, did the British Shores, as hee saith, Serve Rome with Oysters. Lib. 9. cap. 54. So that hee may seeme to have given the chiefe price unto British Oysters. Neither thinke I were those Oysters other than these which A so∣nius called Mira, that is, Wonderfull, in this Verse to Paulinus. Mira Caledonius nonnunquam detegit astus. The British Tides sometimes lay bare, Those Oysters huge, that wonderous are. But, of these Oysters and of their pits or stewes in this Coast I will give those leave to write, who being deinty toothed are judicious Clerkes in Kitchenry. Into this Creeke, beside other Rivers, Coln sheddeth himselfe, which growing to an head out of divers Springs in the North part of this County, passeth by the Towne of Hedningham or Hengham, commonly called Heningham, where was a goodly faire proper Castle in times past, and the ancient habitation of the Earles of Oxford who procured a Mercat thereunto. Over against which, upon the other side of the River standeth Sibble Heningham, the place, as I have heard say, wherein was borne Sir Iohn Hawkwood (the Italians corruptly call him Aucuthus ) whom they so highly admired for his warlike prowesse, Hawkwood. that the State of Florence in regard of his notable demerites adorned him with the statue of a man of Armes and an hono∣rable Tombe, in testimony of his surpassing valour and singular faithfull service to their state. The Italians resound his worthy Acts with full mouth, and Paulus Iovius in his Elogia commendeth him. But for my part it may suffice to adde unto the rest this 4. Verses. Tetrasticon of Iulius Feroldus. Hawkwood Anglorum decus, & decus addite genti Italicae, Italico praesidiúmque solo. Ut tumuli quondam Florentia, sic simulachri, Virtutem Iovius donat honore tuam. The glory prime of Englishmen, then of Italians bold, O Hawkwood and to Italy a sure defensive hold: Thy vertue Florence honoured sometime with costly grave, And Iovius adorn's the same now with a statue, brave. This renowned Knight thus celebrated abroad, was forgotten at home, save that some of his kinde souldierly followers founded a Chantery at Castle Heningham for him and for two of his military Companions, * Iohn Oliver and Thomas Newenton Esquires. 14. H. 4. From hence the River Coln, holding on his course by Hawsted, which was the seat of the Family of the Bourchiers, whence came Robert Bourchier Lord Chauncellour of England in the time of King Edward the Third, and from him sprang a most ho∣norable Progeny of Earles and Barons of that name. Thence by Earles Coln (so cal∣led of the Sepulture there of the Earles of Oxford ) where Aubry de Vere in the time of King Henry the First founded a little Monastery and became himselfe a religious Monke; Colonia. it comes to Colonia, whereof Antonine the Emperour maketh mention, and which he noteth to bee a different place from the Colony Camalodunum. Now whether this tooke name of a Colony hither brought, or of the river Coln, Apollo him∣selfe had neede to tell us: I would rather derive it from the river, seeing, as I doe, that many little Townes situate upon it, are named Coln. A Earles Colne, Wakes Colne, Colne Engaine, Colchester. Whites Colne, bearing the names all of their Lords. The Britaines cal∣led this Caer Colin, the Saxons , and wee Colchester. A proper and fine Burrough it is, well traded and pleasantly seated, as being situate upon the brow of an hill, stretching out from West to East, walled about, beautified with 15. Churches, besides that large and stately one, without the walles, which Endo Sewar to King Henry the First consecrated unto Saint Iohn, now ruinated, and converted into a pri∣vate dwelling house. 1105. In the middest of the Towne, there is a Castle now yeelding to time ready to fall: which as our Historians write, Edward the sonne of Aelfred first raised from the ground, what time as he repaired Colchester defaced with warres, and long after Mawde the Empresse gave it to Alberic Vere to assure him to her Party. The infinite deale of ancient Coine daily gotten out of the ground there doth most plainly shew that this flourished in the Roman time in happy estate. Yet have I light of no peeces more ancient than of Gallienus. For, the most were such as had up∣on them the Inscriptions of the Tetrici, and the Victori i, of Posthumus, C. Carausius, Constantine, and the Emperours that followed him. The Inhabitants affirme, that Flavia Iulia Helena the mother of Constantine the Great was borne and bred there, Helen Great Constantines mother. being the daughter of King Coel: and in memory of the Crosse which shee found, they give for their Armes a Crosse enragled betweene foure Crownes: whence it is, that our Necham as touching her, and this place came out with these Verses, although Apollo was not greatly his friend therein, Effulsit sydus vitae, Colcestria lumen Septem Climatibus lux radiosa dedit. Sydus erat Constantinus, decus imperiale, Servijt huic flexo poplite Roma potens. From out of thee, O Cholchester, there shone a Starre of life, The raies whereof to Climats seven gave great and glorious light, This Starre was Constantine the Great, that noble Emperour, Whom Rome in all obedience lay prostrate to adore. Verily shee was a woman of life most holy, and of invincible resolution and con∣stancy in propagation of Christian Religion: Whereupon in ancient Inscriptions she is every where named PIISSIMA, and VENERABILIS AUGUSTA, that is, Most DEVOUT, and VENERABLE EMPRESSE. Beneath this, where the River Coln runneth into the Sea, S. Osith. Chic. standeth to be seene Saint Osithes, a little Towne, whose ancient name, which was Chic, is growne out of use by reason of Osith the Virgin of royall Parentage, who being wholy devoted to the Service of God, and stabbed there to death by the Danish Pirates, was of our Ancestours honoured for a Saint: and in her memoriall Richard Bishop of London about the yeare 1120. built a religious house, of Regular Chanons. But now it is the chiefe seate of the right honourable Lords Darcy, called De Chich, whom King Edward the Sixth advanced to the honour of Barons when hee created Sir Thomas Darcy his Counsellour, Barons Darcy of Chich. Vice-chamberlaine, and Captaine of the Guard, Lord Darcy of Chich. From hence the Shore shooting out, buncheth foorth as farre as to the Promon∣tory Nesse, Nesse. which in the English-Saxon tongue is called . What hath beene found in this place, have heere out of the words and credit of Ralphe the Monke of Coggeshall, who wrote 350. yeares agoe. In King Richards time, on the Sea∣shore, at a Village called Eadulphnesse, Giants. Giants bones. were found two teeth of a certaine Giant, of such a huge bignesse, that two hundred such teeth as men have now a daies might bee cut out of them. These saw I at Coggeshall (quoth hee) and not without wondering. And such ano∣ther Giantlike thing (I wot not what) as this, was in the beginning of Queene Eli∣zabeths Raigne digged up by R. Candish a Gentleman, neere unto this place. Nei∣ther doe I deny, but there have beene men, that for their huge bodies, and firme strength were wonderous to behold: whom God, as S. Austin saith, would have to live upon the earth, thereby to teach us, that neither beauty of body, nor talnesse of stature, are to bee counted simply good things, seeing they bee common as well to Infidels as to the godly. Yet may we very well thinke, that which Suetonius hath written, namely that the huge limmes of monstrous Sea-creatures else where, and in this Kingdome also, were commonly said and taken to have beene Giants bones. From this Promontory, the shore bendeth backe by little and little to the mouth of Stoure, a place memorable for the battaile at Sea there fought betweene the English and Danes in the yeare 884. where now lyeth Harewich a most safe Road, Harewich. whence it hath the name: * For, in the English-Saxon tongue, betokeneth a Station, or a creeke where an Army encamped. The Towne is not great, but well peopled, forti∣fied by Art and Nature, and made more sensible by Queene Elizabeth. The salt water so creeketh about it, that it almost insulateth it, but thereby maketh the Springs so brackish, that there is a defect of fresh water, which they fetch some good way off. This is the Stoure, that running betweene Essex and Suffolke serveth as a bound to them both, and on this side watereth nothing else but rich and fruitfull fields. But not farre from the head thereof standeth Bumstead, which the Family of Helion held by Barony, from whom the Wentworths of Gosfield are descended. And what way this Country looketh toward Cambridge-shire Barklow sheweth it selfe, Barklow. well knowne now, by reason of foure little hils or Burries cast up by mans hand: such as in old time were wont to be raised (so some would have it) as Tombes for Soldiers slaine, * whose Reliques were not easie to be found. But when a fifth and sixth of them were not long since digged downe, three troughes of stone were found, and in them broken bones of men, as I was informed. The country people say that they were reared after a field there fought against the Danes. Ancient tombes. For, Dane-wort which with bloud-red berries, commeth up heere plenteously, they still call by no other name than Danes-bloud, Danes-bloud. of the number of Danes that were there slaine, verily beleeving that it blometh from their bloud. Walden. A little below standeth upon a hill Walden of Saffron, called Saffron Walden, a∣mong the fields looking merily with most lovely Saffron. A very good Mercat towne incorporated by King Edward the Sixth with a Treasurer, two Chamberlaines and the Commonalty. Commonly called Mande∣villes. Famous in times past it was for a Castle of the Magnavilles (which now is almost vanished out of sight) and an Abbay adjoyning, founded in a place very commodious in the yeare 1136. wherein the Magnavilles founders thereof were buryed. Geffrey de Magnavilla was the first that gave light and life (as it were) to this place. For Mawde the Empresse in these words (out of her very Patent I copy them) gave unto him Newport (a good bigge Towne, this is hard by). For so much as hee was wont to pay that day whereon (as her words are) my father King Henry was alive and dead: and to remove the Mercat from Newport into his Castle of Walden, with all the cu∣stomes that before time in better manner appertained to that Mercat, to wit in Toll, passage and other customes, and that the waies of Newport neere unto the water banke bee directed streight according to the old custome into Walden, upon the ground forfeited unto me: and that the Mercat of Walden be kept upon Sunday and Thursday: and that a Faire bee holden at Walden to begin on Whitsunday even, and to last all the Whitson weeke. (And from that time, by occasion of this Mercat, for a great while it was called Cheping Walden ). Also as it is in the Booke of Walden Abbay, hee the said Geffrey appointed Walden to bee the principall place and seat of his honour and Earledome for him and his Successours. The place where hee built the Abbay had plenty of waters, which rising there continually doe runne and never faile. Late it is ere the Sunne riseth and shineth there, and with the soonest he doth set and carry away his light, for that the hilles on both sides stand against it. That place now they call Audley End, of Sir Thomas Audley Lord Chancellour of England, who changed the Abbay into his owne dwelling house. This Thomas, created by King Henry the Eighth Baron Audley of Walden, Baron Audley of Walden. left one sole daughter and heire Margaret, second wife to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, of whom hee be∣gat Lord Thomas, Lord William, Lady Elizabeth, and Lady Margaret. The said Thomas employed in sundry Sea-services with commendation Queene Elizabeth summoned by Writ unto the High Court of Parliament, among other Barons of the Realme, by the name of Lord Howard of Walden. 1597. And King James of late girded him with the sword of the Earldome of Suffolke, and made him his Chamberlaine: who in this place hath begunne a magnificent Building. Neere to another house of his at Che∣sterford, there was a Towne of farre greater antiquity, hard by Icaldun, in the very border of the Shire, Burrow-banke. which now of the old Burgh, the rusticall people use to call Burrow Banke, where remaine the footings onely of a Towne lying in manner dead, and the manifest tract of the very walles. Yet will I not say, that it was VILLA FAUSTINI, which Antonine the Emperour placeth in this Tract: and albeit Ingrata haud lati spatia detinet campi, Sed rure vero, barbaróque laetatur: It takes not up large ground that yeelds no gaine, But Country like, is homely rude and plaine: Yet dare not I once dreame that this is that Villa Faustini, which in these and other Verses is by that pleasant and conceited Poet Martiall, depaincted in his Epigrams. The fieldes heere on every side (as I said) smell sweetly, and smile pleasantly with Saffron, Saffron. a commodity brought into England in the time of King Ed∣ward the Third. This in the moneth of uly every third yeere, when the heads there∣of have been plucked up and after twenty daies spitted or set againe under mould, about the end of September they put foorth a whitish blew flower, out of the mid∣dle whereof there hang three redde fillets of Saffron (we call them Chives ) which are gathered very early in the morning before the Sunne rising, and being plucked out of the flower, are dried at a soft fire. And so great increase commeth heereof that out of every acre of ground there are made fourescore or an hundred pounds weight of Saffron, while it is moist: which being dried yeeld some twe y pound in weight. And that, which a man would marvell more at, the ground which three yeeres together hath borne Saffron, will beare aboundance of Barley eigh∣teene yeeres together without any dunging or manuring, and then againe beare Saffron as before if the inhabitants there have not misinformed me, or I mis-concei∣ved them. More into the South is Clavering seated, Barons of Clavering. which King Henry the Second gave un∣to Sir Robert Fits-Roger (from whom the family of Evers are issued.) The posterity of this Sir Roger, after they had a long time taken their name of their fathers fore∣name, or Christen-name according to that ancient custome, as Iohn Fitz-Robert, Ro∣bert Fitz-Iohn, &c. afterwards, by the commandement of King Edward the First, they assumed from hence the name of Clavering. See in Nor∣thumberland. But of these I am to speake in Nor∣thumberland. Stansted Montfichet heere also putteth up the head: which I will not passe over in silence, considering it hath been the Baronie or habitation in times past of the family De Monte Fisco, Barons Montfichet. The Montfichet Coat of Armes▪ Playz. commonly Mont-fitchet, who bare for their Armes three Cheverus Or, in a shield Gueles, and were reputed men of very great nobility. But five of them flourished in right line: and at the last three sisters were seized of the inhe∣ritance, Margaret wife of Hugh De Boleber, Aveline wedded to William De Fortibus Earle of Aumarle, and Philip wife to Hugh Playz. The posterity male of this Hugh flourished within the remembrance of our great Grandfathers, and determined in a daughter married to Sir Iohn Howard Knight; from whose daughter by Sir George Vere, descended the Barons Latimer, and the Wingfeldes. And a little below, Haslingbury. is Haslingbury to bee seene, the residence of the Barons Mor∣ley: of whom I shall speake more in Norfolke. And close to this, standeth an an∣cient Fort or Military fense thereof named Walbery: Barington. and more East-ward Barring∣ton Hall, where dwelleth that right ancient Family of the Barringtons, which in the Raigne of King Stephen the Barons of Montfiche enriched with faire possessi∣ons, and more ennobled their house in our fathers remembrance by matching with one of the daughters and coheires of Sir Henry Pole, Lord Montacute, sonne of Mar∣garet Countesse of Salisbury, descended of the Bloud Royall. Neither is Hatfield Regis, Hatefield Brad-oke. commonly called of a broad spread Oke, Hatfield Brad-Oake to be omitted, where Robert Vere Earle of Oxford built a Priory, and there lieth entombed crosse-legged with a French inscription, wherein he is noted to be first of that name Robert, and third Earle of Oxford. After the comming of the Normans, Mande the Empresse, Lady of the English (for so shee stiled herselfe) created Geffrey De Magnavilla, Earles of Essex usually called Mandevil, son to William by Margaret daughter and heire of E do the Steward or Shewar, the first Earle of Essex, that shee might so by her benefits oblige unto her a man both mighty and martiall. Who in those troublesome times under King Stephen despoiled of his estate made an end of his owne turbulent life with the sword. And hee verily for his wicked deeds (as I finde in an old Writer) justly incurred the worlds censure and sentence of excommunication: Register of Walden. in which while hee stood, hee was deadly wounded in the head at a little Towne called Burwell. When he lay at the point of death ready to give his last gaspe there came by chance certaine Knights Templars, who laid upon him the habit of their reli∣gious Profession signed with a red Crosse, and afterwards when hee was full dead, taking him up with them, enclosed him within a Coffin of Lead, and hunge him upon a tree in the Orchard of Old Temple at London. For in a reverent awe of the Church they durst not bury him, because he dyed excommunicated. After him succeeded Geffry his sonne, who was restored by Henry the Second to his fathers honours and Estate for him, and his heires; but he having no children left them to his brother William, who by his wife was also Earle of Albemarle, and dyed likewise in his greatest glory issue∣lesse. Some yeares after K. John promoted Geffrey Fitz-Petre, Justicer of England, a wise and grave Personage unto this honour in consideration of a great masse of mo∣ney and Title by his wife Beatrice the eldest daughter of William de Say, who was the sisters sonne of that great Geffrey de Magnavill, the first Earle of Essex. This Fitz-Petre, a man (as an old Authour writeth) Passing well monied had formerly dealt with the Bishop of Ely the Kings chiefe Justicer, for a great peece of money presently paid and by intreaty beside; and then claimed, and demanded the Earledome in his wives right, as be∣ing the daughter of William Say eldest brother to Geffrey Say. Who gave him full Seisin thereof, (against Geffrey Say) and required the money that hee promised: which within a short time hee received of him every penny well and truely paid, for to bee brought into the Kings coffers. Thus being admitted, and confirmed by the Kings Letters Patent, hee held and possessed it taking Homage of all that held of him in Knights service.. And so was girt with the sword of the Earledome of Essex by King John at the solemnity of his Corona∣tion. This Geffrey Fitz-Petre was advanced to the high estate of Justicer of England by King Richard the First, when hee removed Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury from that Office by the Popes peremptory command: for that Bishops ought not to inter∣medle in secular affaires. This Place the said Geffrey Fitz-Petre executed with great commendation preserving by his wisedome the Realme from that confusion which it after fell into by King Johns unadvised carriage. Register of Walden Mo∣nastery. His two Sonnes Geffrey and Willi∣am, assumed unto them the sirname of Magnavill or Mandevill, and enjoyed this honour successively. As for Geffrey, hee by his wife was Earle of Glocester also, and being a young man lost his life at a Turneament. William tooke part with Lewis of France against King John, and departed out of this World without issue. These being thus dead childelesse, their sisters sonne Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford and high Constable of England, succeeded in their roome. See the Earles of Hereford. Of this mans Posterity male, there succeeded many yeares together one after another, Earles of H reford and of Essex: of whom I will speake among the Earles of Hereford, seeing that they wrote themselves Earles of Hereford and of Essex. Aeleonor the eldest daughter of the last of these Bohuns, being given in marriage to∣gether with the Title of Essex unto Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester, bare un∣to him a daughter named Anne, who had for her first Husband Edmund Earle of Stafford, from whom came the Dukes of Buckingham: and for her second Sir William Bourchier, unto whom King Henry the Fifth gave the Earledome of Ew in Norman∣die. This William of her body begat Henry Bourchier, whom King Edward the fourth invested in the Dignity of the Earledome of Essex, in regard hee had marryed his Aunt, Eliz. sister to Rich. Duke of Yorke. and was descended from Thomas of Woodstocke. Hee had to succeede him another Henry, his Grand-childe, who being cast out of the sadle by a flinging horse, lost his life, leaving behinde him one onely daughter Anne, who being then little respected, King Henry the Eighth presently and all at once made Thomas Cromwell, (whom hee had used as his Instrument to suppresse and abolish the Popes authority) Earle of Essex, Lord Great Chamberlaine of England and Knight of the Order of Saint George: whom before for his reaching politique head, hee had made Baron Cromwell of Ok ham, The Kings Vicar generall in Spirituall matters, and Lord of the Privie Seale: and all these honours were heaped upon him within the compasse of five yeares. But in the fifth moneth after hee was Earle, hee lost his head and so had the en∣terlude of his life a bloudy Catastrophe, as most of these have, who are busie mana∣gers of the greatest affaires. And then the same King thought Sir William Parr, upon whom hee had bestowed in marriage Anne the onely daughter and heire of the foresaid Henry Bour ier, worthy also to be entituled Earle of Essex. But at the last, after Parr was dead without issue, Walter D'Eureux Vicount Here∣ford, whose great Grandmother was Cecilie Bourgchier Sister to Henrie Bourgchier whom I named right now, through the gracious favour of Queene Elizabeth, re∣ceived this dignitie of the Earledome of Essex, and left it to his Sonne Robert. Who being adorned with singular gifts of nature, and supported besides with the speciall favour of his most gracious Prince, grew so fast unto such honour, that all England conceived good hope hee would have fully equalled, yea and farre surpassed the greatest vertues and praises of all his Progenitours. But (alas) whiles he was car∣ried away with popularity, and made hast to out goe his hopes, hee cast himselfe headlong into destruction: as many more have done, who despising that which might come by patience with securitie, have made choise to hasten thereto before time with their finall overthrow. But our most gracious Soveraigne King Iames of his Royall benignitie hath resto∣red his sonne Robert to his bloud, and honours by Parliament authority. There be counted in this County Parish Churches 415. ICENI. THe Region next unto the Trinobantes which afterwards was called East-England, and containeth Suffolke, Nor∣folke, and Cambridge-shire with Huntingdon-shire, was inhabited in times past by the ICENI, called elsewhere amisse TIGENI: and in Ptolomee more corruptly SIMENI: whom also I have thought hee etofore to have been in Caesar by a confused name, termed CENIMAGNI: and so to thinke induced I was, partly by that most neere affinity betweene these names ICENI, and CENI-MAGNI, and in part by the consent of Caesar and Tacitus together. For Caesar writeth that the Cenimagni yeelded them∣selves unto the Romans: which Tacitus recordeth that the Iceni likewise did, in these words: They willingly joyned in amity with us. But (that which maketh most to the cleering of this poynt) in a Manuscript old booke for CENIMAGNI, we finde written with the word divided in twaine, CENI¦AGNI. For which if I might not be thought somewhat too bould a Criticke, I would reade instead thereof ICENI, REGNI. Neither verily can you finde the Cenimagni elsewhere in all Britain, if they be a diverse people from the Iceni and Regni. But of this name ICENI, there remaine in this tract very many footings, if I may so tearme them, as Ikensworth, Ikenthorpe, Ikbortow, Iken, Ikining, Ichlingham, Eike, &c. Yea and that high street-way, which went from hence, the Historians of the former age every where doe name Ichenild-Street, Ichenild-street. as one would say, the Icenes street. What should be the reason of this name (so love me Truth ) I dare not guesse, unlesse one would fetch it from the Wedge-like-forme of the country, and say, it lieth Wedgwise vpon the Sea. For the Britans in their language call a Wedge Iken, and for the same cause a place in Wales, by the Lake or Meere Lhinte∣gid, is of that forme named Lhan-yken, as Welsh-Britans enformed me: and in the very same sense a little country in Spaine (as Strabo writeth) is cleped SPHEN, Sphen. that is, The wedge, and yet the same seemeth not to resemble a wedge so neere, as this of ours doth. A mighty nation this was, as saith Tacitus, and after they had betaken themselves to the protection of the Romans, never shaken nor troubled unto Claudius his time. For then, when as Ostorius the Romane Lieutenant rai∣sed fortifications vpon the rivers and disarmed the Britans, they assembled their forces and made head against him: but after that the Romanes had broken through the rampier, wherewith they had fenced themselves, they were vanqui∣shed not without great slaughter. In which fight verily, they performed many worthy acts, and M. Ostorius the Lieutenants sonne wonne the honour of sa∣ving a Citizens life. When this warre was thus husht, scarce 13. yeeres had gone over their heads, when a new tempest of warre arose upon these occasions. Prasu∣tagus King of these Iceni, to secure (though it were with the hurt of his own pri∣vate estate) his kinred from calamity, ordained by his last will and testament Nero the Emperor to be his heire, supposing that by this obsequious service of his (let Tacit. speak for me a while) his Kingdom and house both should be safe from all injury; which fell out cleane contrary: so that his Kingdome was wasted by the Centurions, and his house by slaves, as if they had been subdued by force. And now first of all, his wife Boodicia, who also is called Bunduica was whipped, and her daughters defloured. All the principall men of the Iceni, as though they had received the whole Country in free gift were stript of their goods, and turned out of their ancient inheritance: those also of the Kings stocke and bloud accoun∣ted no better than bondslaves. By occasions of which grievous injuries and for fear of greater indignities (for so much they had been reduced into the forme of a province) in all hast they tooke armes, having withall sollicited the Trinoban∣tes to rebellion, and others also who had not as yet been inured to bondage: These by privie conspiracies agreed to resume their libertie, being incensed with most bitter and deadly hatred against the old souldiers planted at Maldon above said. Thus began a most dangerous warre to kindle, which was set more on a light fire by the greedy covetousnesse of Seneca, Seneca his usury in Britanny. who about that time exacted with extremitie 400000. Sesterces, an hundred times told, (which amount to three hundred thousand pounds of our money) so increased by his biting usu∣rious contracts. In this warre, that I may be briefe, that Boodicia, whom Gildas seemeth to call the crafty Lionesse, wife to Prasutagus, slew outright of Romanes and their associates fourescore thousand, rased Caimalodunum their Colonie, and the free towne Verulamium. The ninth Legion she discomfited, and put to flight Catus Decianus the Procuratour: but at length she being put to the worst by Suetonius Paulinus in a pitched field, with an invincible courage and resolu∣tion died (as Tacitus writeth) by drinking a cup of poison; or as Dio saith, by sicknesse. In the heat of this war, Xiphilinus recordeth out of Dio, that the Bri∣tans especially worshipped the Goddesse VICTORIE under the name of AN∣DATES, Andates or Andrastes. The Goddesse Victory. which the Greeke booke in another place calleth Andrastes: also that in her sacred grove, they sacrificed prisoners alive in most barbarous and sa∣vage maner. And yet the Britans in these daies acknowledge no such name of Victorie, neither know I what the meaning of it should be, unlesse, as the La∣tins have called Victorie Victoriam, à vincendo, that is, of winning: the Sabins acunam, ab Vevacuando, that is, of emptying and making rid∣dance: and the Grecians NIKHN, , that is, of not yeelding or gi∣ving backe: so the Britans named it Anaraith, of overthrowing; For, so they terme a mischievous and deadly overthrow. But thus much slightly by the way. From those times ever since no mention is there in authors of the Iceni, neither can any thing by reading be found, but that the Romans, when their Empire went apace to decay, In Kent. did set a new officer over the sea coasts along these and other coun∣tries to restraine the piracies and robberies of the Saxons, whom, as I have said heeretofore, they called Earle or Lieutenant. Comes of the Saxons shore along Britaine. But when the English Saxons now had established their Seven king∣domes. Heptarchie in this Iland, this province became part of the Kingdome of East Angles, which of the site thereof Eastward they named in their language, , that is, East-Angle. The Kingdome of East English: and it had for the first King thereof, Vffa, Uff kines. whence his successors were a long time called Vff Kines, who seem to have been Vassals sometimes to the Kings of Mercia, and sometimes to the Kings of Kent. Whose offspring being come to an end in S. Edmund ; the Danes overran this country most piteously for the space of 50. yeares or thereabout, afflicting it with all the calamities that accompany the wars: untill that King Edward the elder having subdued them united it at length to his owne Kingdom of the West-Saxons. But afterwards, it had peculiar Presidents and Governors: which hono∣rable place at the first comming in of the Normans, Ralph Presi∣dent of East-Angle. and a while after one Ralph born in the lesser Britain held; a man of a perfidious disposition and disloyall, who at a celebration of a marriage in most sumptuous manner, wickedly with many moe conspired the death of William the Conqueror▪ but in vaine it was to hope for secrecy and trust, among so many privie to the conspiracy: For, it was disco∣vered, and he deprived of his dignity was attainted, and the rest beheaded. But these things are to bee handled more at large by the Historians: and now let us goe in hand with that which belongeth properly, to our purpose, that is, the places themselves. What kind of country this was, behold how Abbo Floriacensis, who lived in the yeare of Christ 970. hath pictured out in these words: This part which is called East Angle or East England is renowned, as for other causes, so in this regard, that it is watered almost on every side: being on the Southeast and East environed with the Ocean, and on the North-east with huge Fennes soked in moisture, which rising by reason of the levell ground from the mids in manner of all Britaine, for the space of a hundred miles and more doth descend with the greatest rivers into the sea. But of that side which lieth Westward the Province it selfe is continuate to the rest of the Iland, and therefore passable throughout: but, least it should be overrun with the often irruptions and brea∣kings in of enemies, it is fensed along with a banke like unto a wall, and a Trench. Inwardly the soile is fruitfull enough, and the country of a passing fresh hue, with pleasant Orchards, Gardens, and groves, most delectable for hunting, notable for pastures, and not meanly stored with sheepe and other cattell. I say nothing of the fishfull rivers, considering that of the one side the sea licketh it with his Tongue: and of the other side there are by reason of the broad Fennes and wide Marishes an infinite number of pooles two or three miles over. Which Fennes doe afford to a multitude of Monkes their wished private retyrings of a recluse and solitary life: wherein as long as they are en∣closed, they need not the solitarinesse of any desert Wildernesse. Thus farre Abbo. SVFFOL IAE Comitatus (cuius Populi olim ic m Dicti) Continens inse oppida mercatoria xxv Pagos et Villas CCCCLXIIII. Vna cum singulis Hundredis et fluminibus in code e Auc Fore Christ ph r Saxton. SOUTH-FOLKE or SUFFOLKE. S UFFOLKE, which wee must speake of first, in the Saxon Tongue , that is, South-folke, or people in respect of Northfolke, hath on the West side Cambridge-shire, on the South the River Stoure, which divideth it from Essex: on the East side the German Sea, and on the North two little Rivers; Ouse the least, and Waveney, which flowing out as it were of the same Fountaine, runne divers wayes, and sever it apart from Norfolke. A large country it is, and full of havens, of a fat and fertile Soile, (unlesse it be Eastward) being compounded (as it is) of clay and marle: by meanes whereof, there are in every place most rich and goodly corne fields, with pastures as battable, for grazing and feeding of cattell. And great store of cheeses are there made, which to the great commodity of the Inhabitants are vented into all parts of England: Cheeses. Nay into Germany, France, and Spaine also, as Pantaleon the Physitian writeth, who stucke not to compare these of ours for color, and tast both with those of Placentia: but he was no dainty toothed scholar out of Apicius schoole. Nei∣ther bee there wanting woods heere, which have beene more plentifull, and parkes; for many there are lying to Noble mens and Gentlemens houses replenished with game. This County was divided politically into three parts: whereof one is called the Geldable, because out of it there is gathered a Tribute: a second, Saint Edmunds li∣berty, for that it belonged to his Abbay: the third Saint Audries liberty, because it appertained to Ely Abbay, unto which our Kings in times past granted certaine terri∣tories with Sach and Soch, as saith Ely Booke, without any exception either of Ecclesiasti∣call or secular jurisdiction. But let us survey it Chorographically, and beginning at the East side take a view of the better and more remarkeable places. Where it lyeth West and toward Cambridgeshire, in the very limite standeth Ixning, more famous in times past than now. For Audre the Virgin K. Annas daugh∣ter and canonized for a Saint, was heere borne, Ralph also Earle of this East Eng∣land heere entred into conspiracy against William the Conquerour, Novus merca∣tus. and Hervey the first Bishop of Ely made a causey or high way from hence to Ely. But now, for that Newmercate is so neer, Newmercate. Newmarket Heath. whither men resort with their wares and commodities more frequently, it hath begunne to decay. That this Newmercate is a Towne of late dayes built, the very name it selfe doth import: and it is situate in such sort, that the South part therof belongeth to Cambridgeshire, the North side to Suffolke: and both of them have their severall small Churches: whereof this acknowledgeth Ixning, the former Ditton or Dichton, for their mother. Heereof I have found by reading nothing, but that under King Henry the Third, Sir Robert L' Isle gave one part of it in franke marriage with his daughter Cassandra unto Sir Ri∣chard de Argenton, from whom the Alingtons are descended. Heere lyeth out a great way round about, a large Plaine, named of this Towne, Newmarket Heath, consisting of a sandy and barren ground yet greene withall, wherein is to bee seene that wonderfull Ditch, which, as if it had beene cast by the devill, the common sort call Devils Dike, whereas in very trueth, most certainly it is knowne to be one of them, wherewith the Inhabitants, (as Abbo writeth) fenced themselves against the inrodes of their enemies, as shall bee shewed more at large when we are come to Cambridgeshire. Yet in the meane time, I am heere to adver∣tise the Reader, that the least of all these ditches sheweth it selfe two miles from hence betweene Snaile-well and Moulton. More within the Country is that renowned Towne of Saint Edmund, S. Edmunds Bury. which in the Saxons age, men called : and in the time of the Britans, as it should seeme, was that VILLA FAUSTINI, whereof Antonine maketh mention: for of that opinion was Talbot a man right skilfull in antiquities, and very much conversant in this part of England. The distance also, as well from the Iciani, as from Colonia in Antonine agreeth well enough: And as Villa in the Latine Tongue signifieth some Gentlemans house standing upon his land, so , in old English betokened the same. Guord or worth. For, that Abbo aforesaid, interpreteth Bederics-gueord, by these words Bederici Cortis, that is, Villa, that is to say, Bederics-Court, Farme, or Mansion house. Besides that, the Englishmen may seeme to have brought the significancy of that Latine word into their owne Language: For as Faustinus in Latin implieth a certaine mea∣ning of prosperity: so doth Bederic in the German tongue, as writeth that most lear∣ned Hadrianus Iunius, where he interpreteth the name of Betorix (who in Strabo was the sonne of Melo the Sicambrian, ) Full of happinesse and favour. But if these were di∣vers persons, I willingly confesse that I am ignorant, who that Faustinus, and who this Bedericus was. Sure I am that it was not that VILLA FAUSTINI, which Martiall in his Epigrammes depainteth: and if I said it was the habitation of that Beric, Bery the Britan. who being driven out of Britaine, as Dio writeth, persuaded the Emperour Claudius to warre upon the Britans, I should not beleeve my selfe. But whatsoever it was, if it be not that Faustini Villa, yet seemeth it to have beene of famous memory, considering that when Christian Religion began to spring up in this Tract, King Si∣gebert here founded a Church; and Abbo called it Villam regiam, that is, A royall towne: But after that the people had translated hither the body of Edmund that most Chri∣stian King, whom the Danes with exquisite torments had put to death, and built in honour of him a very great Church wrought with a wonderfull frame of timber, it beganne to bee called Edmundi Burgus, commonly Saint Edmundbury, and more shortly, Bury: and flourished marveilous much. But especially since that King Canu∣tus for to expiate the sacrilegious impiety of his father Suenus against this Church, being affrighted with a vision of Saint Edmunds, built it againe of a new worke, en∣riched it, offered his owne Crowne unto the holy Martyr, brought into it Monkes with their Abbot, and gave unto it many faire and large Manours, and among other things the Towne it selfe full and whole: over which the Monkes themselves by their Seneschall had rule and jurisdiction. Whereupon, Ioscelin de Branklond a Monke of this house, writeth thus: The men as well without the Burgh as within are ours, and all within Banna Leuca enjoy the same libertie. Afterwards, Herveie the Abbot comming of the Norman bloud, compassed it round about with a wall, whereof there remaine still some few Reliques, and Abbot Newport walled the Abbay. The Bishop of Rome endowed it with very great immu∣nities and among other things granted, Malmesburi∣ensis. That the said place should bee subject to no Bishop in any matter, and in matters lawfull depend upon the pleasure and direction of the Arch∣bishop. Which is yet observed at this day. And now by this time the Monkes aboun∣ding in wealth erected a new Church of a sumptuous and stately building, enlarging it every day more than other with new workes; and whiles they laid the foundation of a new Chappell in the Reigne of Edward the First, There were found (as Eversden a Monke of this place writeth) The walles of a certaine old Church built round, Eversden. so as that the Altar stood (as it were) in the mids, and we verily thinke, saith he, it was that, which was first built to Saint Edmunds service: But what manner of Towne this was, and how great the Abbay also was while it stood, heare Leland speake: who saw it standing: The Sunne (saith hee) hath not seene either a City more finely seated, (so delicately standeth it upon the easie ascent or hanging of an hill, and a little River runneth downe on the East side there∣of:) or a goodlier Abbay, whether a man indifferently consider, either the endowment with Revenewes, or the largenesse, or the incomparable magnificence thereof. A man that saw the Abbay would say verily it were a Citie: so many Gates there are in it, and some of brasse, so many Towres, and a most stately Church: Upon which attend Now but two. three others also standing gloriously in one and the same Churchyard, all of passing fine and curious Workmanship. If you demand how great the wealth of this Abbay was, a man could hardly tell, and namely how many gifts and oblations were hung upon the Tombe alone of Saint Edmund: and besides, there came in, out of lands and Revenewes, a thousand five hun∣dered and three score pounds of old rent by the yeare. If I should relate the broiles severally that from time to time arose betweene the Townesmen and the Monkes (who by their Or Sc eschal. Steward governed the Townesmen) and with how great rage they fell together by the eares, purposedly to kill one another, my relation would seeme incredible. But as great a peece of worke as this was, so long in building and still encreasing, and as much riches as they gathered together for so many yeares with S. Edmunds shrine, and the monuments of Alan Rufus Earle of Britaine and Richmond, Sir Thomas of Brotherton sonne to King Edward the first Earle of Norfolke, and Mar∣shall of England, * Thomas of Beaufor, Duke of Excester, W. Earle of Stafford, Marie Queene Dowager of France Daughter to King Henry the Seaventh, and many other worthie personages there Entombed; were by King Henry the Eighth utterly overthrowne. What time as at one clappe hee suppressed all Monasteries; per∣swaded thereto by such as under a goodly pretense of reforming religion preferred their private respects and their owne enriching before the honour of Prince and Country, yea and before the Glory of God himselfe. And yet there remaineth still lying along the carcasse, as one would say, of that auncient monument, altoge∣ther deformed, but (for ruines I assure you) they make a faire and goodly shew, which who soever beholdeth, hee may both wonder thereat, and withall take pity thereof. Humfrey Duke of Glocester. England also, that I may note this also by the way if ever else it had losse by the death of any Man, sustained here one of the greatest. For, that father in deede of his Country Humfrey Duke of Glocester a due observer of Iustice, and who had furnished his noble witte with the better and deeper kinde of studies, after hee had under King Henry the Sixth governed the Kingdome five and twenty yeares with great commendation, so that neither good men had cause to complaine of, nor evill to finde fault with, was here in Saint Saviours Hospitall brought to his end by the spightfull envy of Margaret of Lorain. Who seeing her husband King Henry the Sixth, to bee a man of a silly simple minde and faint hearted, to the end shee might draw into her owne hands the managing of the State, devised and plotted this wic∣ked deed: but to her owne losse, and this Realme, in the highest degree. For Nor∣mandy and Aquitane were thereby shortly after lost, and Warres more then civill en∣kindled in England. Nere unto this Saint Edmunds Bury, is Rushbroke to be seene, the habitation of the worshipfull Family of the Iermins, Ikesworth. Blund. Knights: and not farre from thence Ikesworth, where there stood an auncient Priory founded by Gilbert Blund, a man of great no∣bility and Lord of Ikesworth, whose issue male by the right line, ended in William, that in King Henry the Third his dayes was slaine in the battell at Lewis, and left two sisters his Heires, Agnes wife to William de Creketot, and Roise wedded to Robert de Valoniis. * Afterward, both here, at Haulsted neere by Rougham, and else-where, the Family of Drury, Drury. (which signifieth in old English, A Pretious jewell ) hath beene of great respect and good note, especially since they married with the heires of Fressil, and Saxham. More Northward is Saint Genovefs Fernham, in this regard memorable, for that Richard Lucy Lord chiefe Justice of England tooke Prisoner there in a pight fielde Robert Earle of Leicester, 1173. making foule worke and havocke here; and withall put to the sword above ten thousand Flemings, whom hee had levied and sent forth to the depopulation of his Country. Here hard by, I had the sight of two very faire houses the one built by the Kitsons Knights, at Hengrave, the possession in times past of Edmund de Hengrave, Hengrave. Culfurth. Sir Nicholas Bacon. a most renowned Lawyer under King Edward the First: the other at Culfurth, erected by Sir Nicolas Bacon, Knight, sonne unto that Sir Nicolas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England: who for his singular wisedome and most sound judgement, was right worthily esteemed one of the two Supporters of this Kingdome in his time. Lidgate. John Lidgate. And not farre off standeth Lidgate a small Village, yet in this respect not to be passed over in silence, because it brought into the World Iohn Lidgate the Monke, whose witte may seeme to have beene framed and shapen by the very Muses themselves: so brightly re-shine in his English verses, all the plea∣sant graces and elegancies of speech, according to that age. Thus much for the more memorable places on the West side of Suffolke. Stoke Clare. On the South side wee saw the river Stour, which immediately from the very spring head spreadeth a great Mere, called Stourmeer: but soone after drawing it selfe within the bankes runneth first by Clare a noble Village: which had a Castle, but now decayed, and gave name to the right noble Family of the Clares, descended from Earle Gislebert the Norman: and the title of Dukedome unto Leonel King Edward the Thirds sonne, who after hee had married a wife out of that house was entituled by his father, Duke of Clarence. For he of this place with a fuller sound, than that of Clare, Earles of Clare. was stiled Duke of Clarence, (like as before him the sonnes of Earle Gislebert and their successors, were hence surnamed De Clare ) and called Earles of Clare. Who died at Ad Albam Pompiam. Languvill in Italy, after he had by a second marriage, matched with a Daughter of Gal acius Vicount of Millain: and in the Collegiat Church here lieth interred: as also Ioan Acres daughter to King Edward the first, married to Gislebert de Clare Earle of Glocester. Here peradventure the Readers may looke, that I should set downe the Earles of Clare so denominated of this place, and the Dukes of Clarence, considering they have beene alwayes in this Realme of right honorable reputation: and verily so will I doe in few words, for their satisfaction in this behalfe. Richard the sonne of Gislebert Earle of Aucensis, or Ew . Augy in Normandy served in the warres under King William when hee entred England, and by him was endowed with the Townes of Clare and Tunbridge. This Gislebert begat foure sonnes, namely Gislebert, Roger, Walter, and Robert ; Guliel. Gemi i∣censis. Lib. 7. c. 37. from whom the Fitz-walters are descended. Gislebert by the daughter of the Earle of Cleremont had issue Richard, who succeeded him; Gislebert, of whom came that Noble Richard Earle of Pembroch and Conquerour of Ireland ; and Wal∣ter. Richard the first begotten sonne was slaine by the Welshmen and left behinde him two sonnes Gilbert and Roger. Rob. Montensis Gilbert in King Stephens dayes was Earle of Herford: howbeit both he and his Successours are more often and commonly cal∣led Earles of Clare, of this their principall seat and habitation, yea and so many times they wrote themselves. After him dying without issue, succeeded his brother Ro∣ger, whose sonne Richard tooke to wife Amice the daughter and one of the Heires to William Earle of Glocester, in right of whom his posterity were Earles of Glocester. And those you may see in their due place. But when at length their issue male fai∣led, Leonel Third sonne of King Edward the Third, (who had married Elizabeth the Daughter and sole Heire of William de Burgh Earle of Vlster, begotten of the Bodie of Elizabeth Clare ) was by his Father honoured with this new Title, Duke of Clarence. But when as hee had but one onely Daughter named Phillippa, wife to Edmund Mortimer Earle of March, King Henry the Fourth created Thomas his owne yon∣ger sonne Duke of Clarence, Dukes of Cla∣rence. who being withall Earle of Albemarle, High Steward of England and Governour of Normandy, and having no lawfull issue was slaine in Anjou by the violent assault of Scots and French. A long time after, king Edward the Fourth bestowed this honour upon his owne brother George, whom after grie∣vous enmity and bitter hatred, hee had received againe into favour, and yet at the last made an end of him in prison, causing him, as the report currently goeth, to be drowned in a Butte of Malmesey. 1421. A thing naturally engraffed in men, that whom they have feared, and with whom they have contended in matter of life, those they hate for ever, though they be their naturall brethren. From Clare, by Long-Melford, a very faire Almes-house lately built by that good man Sir William Cordal Knight, and Maister of the Rolls, Stour passeth on, and com∣meth to Sudbury, Sudbury. that is to say, the South-Burgh, and runneth in manner round about it, which men suppose to have beene in old time the chiefe towne of this Shire, and to have taken this name in regard of Norwich, that is, The Northren Towne. Neither would it take it well at this day to be counted much inferiour to the Townes adjoy∣ning: for, it is populous and wealthy, by reason of Clothing there, and hath for the chiefe Magistrate, a Major, who every yeare is chosen out of seaven Aldermen. Not farre from hence distant, Edwardeston. is Edwardeston, a Towne of no great name at this day, but yet in times past it had Lords therein dwelling of passing great Honour, of the sur∣name of Barones. Monte-chensie. Mont-chensie : out of which Family Sir Guarin Montchensie married the daughter and one of the heires of that mighty William Marescall, Earle of Pembroch, and of her begat a daughter named Ioan, who unto the stile of her Husband William de Valentia of the family of Lusignie in France, brought and adjoyned the title of Earle of Penbroch. Minor Histor. Matth. Paris. But the said Sir Guarin Mont-chensy, as he was a right honourable person, so he was a man exceeding wealthy, * in so much as in those dayes they accounted him the most potent Baron, and the rich Crassus of England. For his last will and te∣stament amounted unto two hundred thousand Markes, no small wealth as the stan∣dard was then. Waldgrave. From a younger brother or cadet of this house of Montchensie, issued by an heire generall the Family of the Waldgraves, who have long flourished in Knightly degree at Smalebridge neerer to Stoure, as another Family of great account in elder ages at Buers, Buers. which was thereof surnamed. A few miles from hence Stour is enlarged with Breton a small Brooke, at one of whose heads is seene Bretenham a very slender little towne, where fcarce remaineth any shew at all of any great building: and yet both the neere resemblance and the signification of the name partly induced me to thinke it to be that COMBRETONIUM whereof Antonine the Emperour made mention in this tract. Cumbretonium. Bretenham. For like as Bretenham in English signifieth an Habitation, or Mansion place by Breton, so Combretonium in Bri∣tish or Welsh betokeneth a Valley, or a place lying somewhat low by Breton. But this in Peutegerius his Table is falsly named COMVETRONUM and ADCOVECIN. Somewhat Eastward from hence is Nettlested seene, Barons Went∣worth. of whence was Sir Thomas Wentworth, whom King Henry the Eighth adorned with the title of Baron Went∣worth, and neere thereto is Offion, that is to say, The towne of Offa King of the Mercians, where upon a clay Hill lie the ruines of an ancient Castle, which they say Offa built, after he had wickedly murdered Aethelbert King of the East-Angles, and usurped his Kingdome. But to returne to the River Breton. * Upon another brooke that joyneth therewith standeth Lancham a pretty Mercat, Lancham. and neere it the Manour of Burnt-Elleie, where∣unto King Henry the Third granted a Mercate at the request of Sir Henry Shelton Lord thereof, Hadley. whose posterity a long time heere flourished. Hadley, in the Saxons language , is watered with the same brooke: a towne of good note in these dayes for making of Clothes: Gathrum or Garmo the Dane. and in old time much mentioned by our Historians, because Guthrum or Gormo the Dane was heere buried. For, when Aelfred brought him to this passe, that he became Christian and was baptized, hee assigned unto him these countries of the East-Angles, that he might (to use the words of mine Author) cherish them by right of inheritance under the Allegiance of a King, which he had overrunne by robbing and ransacking. From hence Breton speedeth it selfe by Higham, whence the family of Higham is so named, Bentley. to Stour which joyntly in one streame runne not farre from Bentley, where the Talmachs of a celebrate ancient house flourished for a long time, and after a few miles neere unto Arwerton the house long since of the family of the Bacons ; Arwerton. who held this Manour, and Brome, by conducting all the footemen of Suffolke and Norfolke from S. Edmunds dike in the warres of Wales. Now it belongeth to the Parkers haere∣ditarily, who by the Fathers side derive their descent from the Barons Morley, and by the Mothers from the Calthrops, a Family sometime of great account in these parts. Beneath this Stour falleth into the Ocean; and at the very mouth thereof, the river Orwell or Gipping dischargeth it selfe together with it. This River springeth up in the very navell or centre, as one would say, of this shire, Wulpet. out of two fountaines, the one neere to Wulpet, the other by Gipping a small Village. Wulpet is a Mercat towne, and soundeth as much as, The Wolves pit, if wee may beleeve Nubrigensis who hath told as prety and formall a tale of this place as is that fable called the TRUE NARRATION of Lucian : Vera narratio. namely, how two little Boyes (forsooth) of a greene colour, and of Satyrs kinde, after they had made a long journey by passages under the ground, from out of another world from the Antipodes and Saint Martins Land, came up heere: of whom if you would know more, repayre to the Author himselfe, where you shall finde such matter as will make you laugh your fill, Norton. if you have a laughing spleene. I wote not whether I were best to relate here, into what a vaine hope of finding gold at Norton hard by, a cer∣taine credulous desire of having, enticed and allured king Henry the Eight; but the digging and undermining there sufficiently shew it, although I say nothing. But be∣tween Gipping and Wulpet upon an high hill remain the tokens of Hawhglee an ancient Castle, Hagoneth. taking up much about two Acres of ground. Some affirme this to have beene called Hagoneth Castle, which belonged to Ralph le Broc, and that in the yeere 1173. it was by Robert Earle of Leicester won and overthrowne in the intestine warre be∣tweene king Henry the Second, and his unkindely disloyall sonne. Upon the same River are seene two little Mercat Townes, Stow and Needham, and not farre from the banke, Hemingston: in which Baldwin Le Pettour (marke his name well) held certaine lands, by Serjeanty, (the words I have out of an old booke) for which on Christmasse day, Farter, every yeere before our soveraigne Lord the King of England he should performe one Saltus, one Suffletus, and one Bumbulus, or, as wee read elsewhere, his tenour was, per saltum, sufflum, & pettum, that is, if I understand these tearmes aright, That hee should daunce, puffe up his cheekes making therewith a sound, A prety con∣ceited tenure. and besides let a cracke downeward. Such was the plaine and jolly mirth of those times. And observed it is, that unto this Foe, the Manour of Langhall be∣longed. Ipswich. Neere unto the mouth of this river we saw Ipswich, in times past Gippwich, a faire towne resembling a Citty, situate in a ground somewhat low: which is the eye (as it were) of this shire, as having an Haven commodious enough; fenced in times past with a trench and rampire, of good trade and stored with wares, well peopled, and full of Inhabitants, adorned with foureteene Churches, and with goodly, large and stately edifices. I say nothing of foure religious houses now overturned, and that sumptuous and magnificent Colledge which Cardinall Wolsey a Butchers sonne of this place, here began to build, whose vast minde reached alwayes at things too high. The body politike, or corporation of this towne consisteth, as I was enfor∣med, of twelve Burgesses ( Portmen they terme them) out of whom are chosen yeere∣ly for the head Magistrates two Baillives, and as many Justices out of foure and twen∣ty others. As touching the Antiquity thereof so farre as ever I could observe▪ the name of it was not heard of before the Danish invasion, whereof it smarted: For in the yeere of salvation 991. the Danes sacked and spoyled it, and all the Sea coast with so great cruelty, that Siritius Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Nobles of England thought it the safest and best course they could take, to redeeme and buy their peace of them for the summe of ten thousand pounds. Neverthelesse, within nine yeeres, they made spoyle of this towne againe, and presently thereupon the Englishmen valiantly encountred them in the field, but through the cowardly running away of one man alone, named Turkill, as writeth Henry of Huntingdon (for in matter of warre things of small weight otherwise, are of right great moment, and sway very much) our men were put to flight, and let the victory slip out of their hands. In the reigne of S. Edward, as we finde in the Survey booke of England, out of this towne Queene Edeva had two parts, and Earle Guert a third part: and Burgesses there were eight hundred, paying custome to the King. Domesday booke. But after the Normans had possessed themselves of England, they erected a pile or Castle here, which Hugh Bigod defended for a good while against Stephen the usurping King of England, but surrendred it in the end: This fort is now quite gone, so as there remaine not so much as the ruines thereof. Some say it was in the parish of Westfield hard by, where is to be seene the rubbish of a Ca∣stle, and where old Gipwic, as men say, stood in times past. I thinke verely it was then demolished, Waleton. when K. Henry the second laied Waleton Castle neer unto it even with the ground. For it was a place of refuge for Rebels, and here landed those three thousand Flemings whom the nobles of Englād had called in against him, what time as he un∣advisedly hee had made Prince Henry his sonne King, and of equall power with himselfe: and the young man knowing no meane, would bee in the highest place or none, set upon a furious desire of the Kingdome, most unnaturally waged warre against his owne father. Albeit these Castles are now cleane decaied and gone, yet this Shore is defended sufficiently with an huge banke, Langerston. they call it Langerston, that for two miles or thereabout in length lyeth forth into the maine Sea, as hee saith, not without great danger and terrour of such as saile that way: howbeit the same serveth very well for Fishermen to dry their fishes, and after a sort is a de∣fence unto that spatious and wide Haven of Orwell. And thus much for the South part of this Shire. From hence the curving Shore (for all this East part lyeth full against the Sea) shooting forth Northward straight-way openeth it selfe to the Others call it Thredling. Deben, a Riveret having his spring-head neere unto Mendelesham ; unto which Towne, the Lord of the place H. Fitz Otho, Master of the Mint, purchased the liberty of Mercat and Faire: by whose Heires there fell no small Possessions unto the Boutetorts Lords of Wily in Worcestershire, Boutetort. and from them againe in the Raigne of Richard the Second, unto Frevil, Barkley of Stoke, Burnel, and others. This River Deben first floweth hard unto the little Mercat Towne Debenham, and giveth it the name, which others would have to be called more truly Depenham, for that the waies every where about it, by reason of a clay ground and the same over moist, are very deepe and cumberous. From thence it runneth by Vfford the seat in times past of Robert de Vfford Earle of Suffolke, and by a Towne over against it on the other side of the River named Rendelisham, Rendelisham. that is, as Beda interpreteth it, Ren∣dils Mansion place, where Redwald King of the East Saxons kept usually his Court, who was the first of all his Nation that was baptised, and received Christianity; but afterwards, seduced by his Wife, he had in the selfe same Church, as saith Beda, one Altar for Christs Religion, and another for sacrifices unto Devils. In this place also Swidelm a King of the East-Angles was likewise afterwards baptised by Bi∣shop Cedde. Chadda. From hence the River Deben passeth downe to Woodbridge, a little Towne beau∣tified with faire houses; where at certaine set times are holden Assemblies for Saint Andrees Liberty : and after it hath gone some few miles, it is received into the Ocean at Bawdsey Haven. By this time now the Shore creepeth by little and little Eastward to the mouth of the River Some name it Winchell. Framlingham. Ore, which runneth neere to Framlingham Castle, belonging some∣time to the Bigods by the bounty of King Henry the First: and forthwith on the West side thereof spreadeth (as it were) into a lake. A very faire and beautifull Ca∣stle this is, fortified with a banke, ditch, and walles of great thicknesse, wherein are thirteene towres, and inwardly furnished with buildings right commodious and ne∣cessary. From hence it was that in the yeare of our Redemption 1173. what time as King Henry the Second his rebellious sonne tooke armes against his father, Ro∣bert Earle of Leicester, with his mercenary Flemings infested this Country farre and neere: from this Castle also in the yeare 1553. Queene Mary entred upon her Kingdome, for all the ambitious fretting and fuming of Iohn Dudley Duke of Nor∣thumberland against King Henry the Eighth his Daughters. Then commeth the River to Parrham a little Towne, Parrham. Barons Wil∣loughbey of Parrham. Oreford. the Lord whereof William Willoughby King Edward the Sixth honoured with the Estate of a Baron: and after∣wards running by Glemham, which gave name to an ancient Family descended from the Bacons and Brandons ; at Oreford, that tooke the name of it, disburdeneth himselfe into the Sea. A bigge Towne this was and of great resort, fenced also with a Castle of a reddish stone, and appertained in times past to the Valoineis, and afterwards to the Willoughbies, but complaineth at this day of the seas unkindnesse which shrin∣keth backe from it by little and little, and beginneth to envie the commodity of an Haven unto the Towne. Neither have I any thing else to say of Oreford, unlesse it please you to runne over these few words of Ralph Cogeshall an old Writer. In King Henry the Seconds daies, saith hee, when Bartholmew Glanvile kept the Castle of Oreford, it happened that the Fishermen caught a wilde man within their nets, who in all parts and members of his body resembled a man, had haire on his head, a huge beard with a Piloe devant, about the breast exceeding hairy and rough: who notwithstanding slipt away secretly to the Sea and was never seene after: So that it may bee very true, which is so rise with the common people, That there is nothing bred in any part of Nature, Tritons and Monsters of the Sea. but the same also is in the Sea: and that it is not altogether a fained Fable, that Plinie hath reported of a Triton taken on the Shore of Portugall, and of the Sea∣man caught in the Streights of Gibraltare. Not much higher, lyeth Aldborough for Situation right safe and very plea∣sant within Slaughden vale, where from the East the Sea, and from the West the Ri∣ver beateth. Aldburgh. This name Aldburgh, is by interpretation the Old Burgh, or as others would have it, The Burgh upon the River Ald. Now it is an harbour very commodi∣ous for Sailers and Fishermen, and thereby well frequented, and acknowledgeth the Ocean Sea to be favourable unto it, how spitefull soever and malicious it is to other Townes in this Coast. Neere unto it, what time as in the yeare 1555. by reason of unseasonable weather the Corne throughout all England was choked and blasted in the eare, there grew Pease miraculously among the rocks, without any earth at all about them about the end of September, Pease growing out of the Rockes. and brought downe the price of Corne. Yet the wiser sort of men doe say that Pulse being cast upon the Shore by Ship∣wracke is wont otherwhiles to come up againe there, so that the thing is not to bee thought miraculous: But, that the like usually every yeare grow of their owne accord among the stones on the Shore of Kent, I have shewed already. Dunwich. From hence coasting along the Shore, at ten miles end, wee met with Dunwich, in the English Saxon tongue Dunmoc, whereof Beda maketh mention: where Faelix the Burgumdium that reduced the Eastangles againe into the faith, when they were backesliding from Christ, in the yeare of Grace 630. placed an Episcopall See, whose Successours for many yeares together were Bishops over all East England. But Bise the Fourth Bishop after Faelix, when hee became very aged and sickly withall, being not able to discharge so great a Jurisdiction, divided it into two Sees: the one continued still in this Dunwich, the other hee placed in North Elm∣ham, a little Towne. In the Raigne of William the Conquerour, Dunwich had in it two hundred and sixe and thirty Burgesses: an hundred poore people: it was valued at fifty pounds, and threescore thousand Herings, of gift. For, so wee reade in Domes-day Booke. In the foregoing Age, it was well peopled and frequented with Inhabitants: famous also for a Mint therein: and in the Raigne of Henry the Second, Allectum or Halecum. as William of Newborough writeth, It was a Towne of good note, and full sto∣red with sundry kindes of Riches. At which time, when England was all on a light fire with new stirres and broiles, it was so fortified, that it made Robert Earle of Leicester affraid, who with his Army over-ranne all the parts there-about at his pleasure. But now by a certaine peculiar spite and envie of Nature, that suffe∣reth the greedy Sea to have what it will and encroche still without all end, the greatest part thereof is violently carried away with the waves, and by reason that the Bishops many yeares agoe translated their Seat to another Place, it lyeth (as it were) desolate. A little above it, the River Blith voideth it selfe into the Sea, on whose banke Southward wee saw Blithborow a small Towne, Blithborrow. which for no o∣ther thing is memorable, but because Anna a Christian King was there buried, whom Penda the Mercian slew in a pitched Field. It was beautified by King Henry the First with a Colledge of Chanons, who granted the same as a Cell to the Chanons of Saint Osiths. And it was made a Mercate by the meanes of Iohn Lord of Clavering, unto whom King Edward the Second gave this Liberty to∣gether with the Faire. And verily a goodly Inheritance hee had in this Tract, as who derived his Descent from the Daughter and Heire of William De Casineto. Cheney, who held the Barony of Horsford in the County of Norfolke, and erected the little Abbay at Sibton. Heere the Promontory Easton-Nesse shooteth out, Easton-Nesse▪ and reacheth farre into the East, which is deemed to bee the farthest East point in all Britaine; Ptolomee calleth it , or EXTENSIO. And that you may not doubt, that this is the very same which wee call Easton, bee it knowne unto you, that Eysteney in the British tongue is the same that in Greeke , Extensio. A Promontory. and in Latine Extensio, that is, A stretching forth: although this name may seeme with as good probability to have beene imposed in our English Language, of the Situation Eastward. Upon the point of this Pro∣montory standeth Easton a Village of Fishermen well neere eaten up by Sea, and on South side of this Promontory, Southwold lieth in the Plaine, full against the open shore of the sea: a Towne well enough frequented through the benefit of an Haven that the River Blith emptying it selfe there into the Sea maketh; and at every high water it is so invironed with the waves, that it seemeth to bee an Island, and a man would wonder that it is not overflowne. In so much as when I saw the manner thereof, Lib. 3. de Natura Deorum. I called that saying of Cicero into my remembrance: What should I speak of the Sea Tides about Spaine and Britaine, and of their Flowing and Ebbing at certaine times? Surely, they cannot bee without the hand of God, who hath restrained and gaged the waves within their bounds. Wingfield. More within the land Wingfield sheweth it selfe, where the walles of a Castle halfe downe are to bee seene: which hath given name to a family in this Tract that is spred into a number of branches, and is besides for knighthood and ancient Gentility renowned, and thereof it was the principall seat: Also Dunnington, Philips. which standeth much upon the Lord thereof Sir Iohn Philips, fa∣ther to that Sir William who married the daughter and Heire of Baron Bardolph, whose daughter and Heire likewise Iohn Vicount Beaumont tooke to Wife: But now the Habitation it is of the ancient Family of the Rousses. Not farre from hence standeth Huntingfield, Huntingfield. Henningham. which had a Baron of that name in King Edward the Third his time, and neere unto it Heveningham, the residence of the Family of Heveningham, knights: who are knowne to bee of very great antiquity: and not farre off standeth Halesworth, Halesworth. in times past Healsworda, an ancient Towne of the Ar∣gentons, and now of the Alingtons: unto which Sir Richard Argenton obtained at the hand of King Henry the Third the liberty of a Mercate. I gave you to understand before, that two small Rivers, Ouse the least, and Wave∣ney on the North side, divided this County from Norfolke; which Riverets ri∣sing out of a Marish ground by Lophamford, from two springs but a little a sunder one from another, take their courses divers wayes with creekes full of shallow fourds. Along by Ouse which runneth Westward, there is nothing in this Quarter to bee seene worth the report. Hoxon. By Waveney side that tendeth Eastward, first is Hox∣on in times past Hegilsdon ennobled by reason of King Edmunds Martyrdome. King Edmunds Martyrdome. For there the most cruell and bloudy Danes (that I may use the words of Abbo ) ha∣ving bound the most Christian King to a tree, for that hee would not renounce Christianity, shot him in with sharpe arrowes all his body over, augmenting the paines of his torment with continuall piercing him with arrow after arrow, and thus inflicted wound upon wound, so long as one arrow could stand by another: And as a Poet of middle time versified of him. Iam loca vulneribus desunt, nec dum furiosis Tela, sed hyberna grandine plura volant. Though now no place was left for wound, yet arrowes did not faile, These furious Wretches; still they flie thicker than winter haile. In which place afterwards stood a very faire house of the Bishops of Norwich, untill they exchanged it not long since for the Abbay of Saint Benet. Hard by, at Brome, Cornwalleis. dwelt a long time the family of Cornwalleis, of knights degree: of whom Sir Iohn Cornwal was Steward of Edward the Sixth his Houshold while hee was Prince; and his sonne Sir Thomas, for his wisdome and faithfulnesse became one of the privie counsell to Queene Mary, Eaye. and Controller of her royall House. Beneath it lieth Eay, that is, The Island ; so called, because it is watered on every side with brookes, where are to bee seene the rubbish, ruines, and decayed walles of an old Castle that belonged to Robert Malet a Norman Baron. But after that he under King Hen∣ry the First was deprived of his Dignity, Liber inquisiti∣onum. because he sided with Robert Duke of Nor∣mandy against the King, the said King bestowed this Honour upon Stephen Earle of Bullen, who, being afterwards the By intrusion reaping the commodities thereof. Vsufructuary King of England left it unto his son William Earle of Warren. But after hee had surrendred his State to King Henry the Second, and lost his life in the expedition of Tholose, the King held it in his owne hands untill that King Richard the First confer'd it upon Henry the Fifth of that name Duke of Brabant and of Lorain, together with King Stephens Neece by his daughter, who had beene a professed Nunne. Long time after, when it was now de∣volved againe upon the Kings of England, King Edward the third gave it, as I have read, to Sir Robert Vfford Earle of Suffolke. Bedingfield. Neither must I passe over in silence Bedingfield neere adjoyning, which gave the name to a worshipfull and ancient Family, that received very much reputation and credit from the Heire of the Family of Tudenham. From thence by Flixton, in stead of Felixton, Flixton. so named of Faelix the first Bishop of these parts; like as many other pla∣ces in this Shire, the River Waveney runneth downe to Bungey, and spreadeth it selfe in manner round about it; Bungey. where Hugh Bigod fortified a Castle both by artificiall workmanship, and also by naturall situation, when as the seditious Barons tossed all England to and fro with stormes of rebellion. Concerning which Castle, as im∣pregnable, he was wont to vaunt in these termes: Were I in my Castle of Bungey Upon the River of Waveney, I would ne care for the King of Cockeney. Yet notwithstanding afterwards he obtained at the hands of King Henry the Se∣cond (by giving him a great summe of money and pledges withall of his loyalty) that it might not be overthrowne and rased. Not farre thence from the banke, you may see Mettingham ; Mettingham. where, upon a plaine, Sir Iohn sirnamed De Norwich Lord of the place built a foure square Castle and a Colledge within it, whose daughter, and in the end the Heire of the same Family, Robert de Vfford aforesaid, Earle of Suffolke tooke to Wife with a goodly Inheritance. Now Waveney drawing neerer unto the Sea whiles hee striveth in vaine to make himselfe a twofold issue into the Ocean, the one together with the River Yare, and the other by the meere Luthing, Luthingland. maketh a pretty big Demy Isle or Biland, which some name Lovingland, others more truely Luthingland, of Luthing the lake spreading in length and bredth, which beginning at the Ocean Shore is discharged into the Ri∣ver Yare. Lestoffe. At the entrance whereof standeth upon the Sea, Lestoffe, a narrow and little Towne: and at the issue of it Gorlston, where I saw the towre steeple of a small sup∣pressed Friery, which standeth the Sailers in good stead for a marke. Within the land, Somerley towne. hard by Yare is situate Somerley towne, the habitation in ancient time of Fitz Os∣bert, from whom it is come lineally to the worshipfull ancient family of the Iernegans Knights of high esteeme in these parts: farther up into the land where Yare and Wa∣veney meet in one streame, there flourished Cnobersburg, that is, as Bede interprereth it, Cnobers City, Cnoberi urbs. we call it at this day Burgh-Castle. Which, as Bede saith, was a most plea∣sant Castle, by reason of woods and Sea together, wherein a Monastery was built by Fursaey a holy Scot : by whose perswasion Sigebert King of the East-Angles became a Monke and resigned up his Kingdome: who afterwards being drawne against his will out of this Monastery to encourage his people in battaile against the Mercians, to∣gether with his company lost his life. In that place now there are only ruinous wals in forme, as it were, foure square, built of flint stone and British Bricke, but all overgrown with briers and bushes: among which otherwhiles are Romane peeces of coines got∣ten forth: So that it may seeme to have been one of those fortifications that the Ro∣mans placed upon the River Yare to represse the piracies of the Saxons: or rather that it was the ancient GARIANONUM it selfe, where the Stablesian Horsemen had their Station, and kepe Ward, at the declination of the Romane Empire in Brit∣taine. Suffolke hath had Earles and Dukes out of sundry families. Dukes and Earles of Suffolke. There bee of the later writers who report, that the Glanvils in times past were honoured with this title: But seeing they ground upon no certain authority, whereas men may easily mistake, and I have found nothing of them in the publike records of the Kingdome, they must pardon me if I beleeve them not, untill they produce more certainty. Yet in the meane while I confesse, that the family of the Glanvils in this tract was of right good note and high reputation. Neither have I hitherto learned by witnesses of credite, that any one was entituled Earle of this Province severally before the daies of King Edward the Third, who created Sir Robert Vfford Earle of Suffolke a man much renowned both in peace and warre, the sonne of Sir Robert Vfford Steward of the Kings house under King Edward the Second, by Cecily de Valoniis Lady of Orford. After him succeeded his sonne William, who having foure sonnes that were taken away by untimely death during his life, died himselfe suddenly in the Parliament house as he was about to report the minde of the Commonalty. And then Sir Robert Willoughby, Roger Lord Scales, and Henrie Ferrars of Groby the next of his blood and his Heires divided the Inheritance betweene them. Afterward King Richard the Second promoted Michael De-la-Pole to this Title, Inquisit. 5. Rich. 2. and made him L. Chancellor of England. Who, as Thomas Walsingham writeth, imployed himselfe more in trafficke and Merchandise, (as having beene a Merchant and a Merchants sonne) than in martiall matters. For he was the sonne of William De-la-pole, that first Maior of Kyngston upon Hull, Leland, in his Commentary upon his Cyg∣nea Cantio. and for his wealthy Estate, adorned by King Edward the Third with the dig∣nity of a Baneret. But when as in the prosperous confluence of so many advancements the mans nature was not capable of so great fortunes, he was enforced by his adver∣saries envy to depart out of his Country, and so died a banished man. His sonne Mi∣chael being restored, died at the siege of Harflew, and againe within one moneth his son Michael was slaine in the battell of Agincourt leaving daughters onely. Walsingham pag. 358. Regist. Monal de Mels . See Hull in Yorkeshire. Then Wil∣liam his brother succeeded, whom King Henry the sixt so favoured that hee made him also Earle of Penbroke, and then Marquesse of Suffolke, to him and the heires males of his body. And that both hee and the heires of his body should carry the golden rod having a Dove in the top thereof, on the Coronation day of the King of England: and the like rod or verge Yuory at the Coronation of the Queenes of England: And afterwards hee advanced the same William for his great service and deserts to the honour and title of Duke of Suffolke. Certes hee was an excellent man in those dayes, famous and of great worth. For whereas his father and three brethren had in the French wars lost their lives for their Country, he, as we finde in the Parliament Rols of the 28. of King Henry the Sixth, in the same war served full 34. yeeres: For seventeene yeeres together he never returned home from warfare; being once taken prisoner when he was as yet no better than a private Knight, hee paid downe for his ransome twenty thousand pounds of our English mony: hee was of the Kings privy Counsell 15. yeeres; and a Knight of the Order of the Garter 30. Hereupon, as he stood in espe∣ciall grace and favour with his Prince, so he incurred therefore the greater envy of the common people, and some emulatours: being grievously charged with treason and misprisions. And therefore called before the King and Lords of the Parliament, after he had answered the Articles objected, referred himselfe to the Kings order. Whereupon the Chancellor by the Kings commandement pronounced, that where∣as the Duke did not put himselfe upon his Peeres, the King touching the Articles of treason, would be doubtfull, and as for the Articles of misprision, not as a Judge by advice of the Lords, but as one to whose order the Duke had submitted himselfe, did banish him the realme and all other his dominions for five yeeres. But when he was embarked for France, he was by his adversaries intercepted upon the sea and behea∣ded. He left a son nam'd Iohn De-la-Pole, who wedded K. Edward the fourth his sister, and of her begate Iohn Earle of Lincolne by K. Richard the Third proclaimed heire apparant of the Crowne: whose ambitious minde puffed up and giddy therewith could not containe it selfe, but soone after brake out against King Henry the Sea∣venth, to his owne destruction (for in the battell at Stoke he was quickly slaine) to his fathers death also, (who for very griefe of heart ended his dayes) and to the ut∣ter ruine of the whole family, which together with them was in a sort extinguished and brought to nothing. For, his brother Edmund being Earle of Suffolke fled into Flanders: began there to conspire and stir up rebellion against King Henry the Sea∣venth, who, albeit he feared him, would seeme to favour him, and as a Prince better contented with repentance than punishment, freely pardoned him for sundry offen∣ces, that he might winne him. But after he was thus fled, his estate was forfeited, and the King never thought himselfe secure from his practises, untill he had so farre pre∣vailed with Philip Duke of Burgundy, that he was delivered into his hands (against the Law of hospitality toward strangers, as some then gave out) upon solemne pro∣mise in the word of a Prince that his life should be spared. Neverthelesse he was kept close prisoner, and after executed by King Henry the Eighth (who thought himselfe not tied to his fathers promise) what time as hee first minded to make warre upon France, for feare least in his absence some troubles might bee raised at home in his behalfe, yet his yonger brother S. Richard de la Pole a banished man in France, usurped the title of Duke of Suffolke : who being the last male (to my knowledge) of this house, was slaine in the battell of Pavie (wherein Francis the first, king of France was taken prisoner in the yeer of our Lord 1524.) fighting manfully among the thickest of his enemies. For whom, in consideration of his singular valour, and high paren∣tage the Duke of Burbon himselfe, although hee was his enemy, made a sumptuous funerall, and honored the same with his presence in mourning blacke. In the meane time, king Henry the Eighth adorned Sir Charles Brandon, unto whom he had given in marriage his owne sister Marie widdow, and Dowager to Lewis the twelfth king of France, with the title of Duke of Suffolke, and granted to him all the Honours, and Manours which Edmund Earle of Suffolke had forfeited. After whom succeeded Henry his sonne a childe, and after him his brother Charles : who both died of the English swet upon one day in the yeere 1551. Then king Edward the Sixth honou∣red with that title Henry Grey Marquesse Dorset, who had married Francis their sister: but he enjoying the same but a small time lost his head in Queene Maryes dayes for complotting to make his daughter queen, and was the last Duke of Suffolk. From that time lay this title of Suffolke void, untill that very lately king James advanced to that honour Thomas Lord Howard of Walden, the second sonne of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, whom for his approved fidelity and vertue he also made his Lord Cham∣berlaine, in his first entrie into the kingdome. The Parishes in this County amount to the number of 575. NORFOLCIAE comitatus quem olī ICENI Insederunt. Centinens in Sc ovida Mercatoria. XXVI. Pagos et villas DCXXV na Cum Singulis hundredi t fluminibus in codem. An eri Christophere Saylon. NORTH-FOLKE. N ORTH-FOLKE, commonly Norfolke, which is by interpre∣tation, people of the North, lieth Norward of Suffolke, from which it is divided by those two little Rivers which I spake of, Ouse the least, and Waveney, running divers wayes: on the East and North side the German Ocean which is plentifull of Fish beateth upon the shores with a mighty noise: On the West, the greater Ouse, a River disporting himselfe with his manifold branches and divisions secludeth it from Cam∣bridge-Shire. It is a Region large and spacious, and in manner all throughout a plaine champion, unlesse it bee where there rise gently some pretty Hills; passing rich, exceeding full of Sheepe, and stored with Conyes: replenished likewise with a great number of populous Villages: for, beside twenty seven Mercat townes, it is able to shew Villages and Country Townes 625: Watered with divers Rivers and Brookes, and not altogether destitute of Woods. The soyle, according to the variety of places, is of a divers nature: Some where, fat, ranke, and full of moisture, as in Mershland and Flegg: otherwhere, but Westward especially, leane, light, and sandy: elsewhere, standing upon clay and chalke. But the goodnesse of the ground a man may collect by this (whence Varro willeth us to gather it) that the Inhabitants are of a passing good complexion: to say nothing of their exceeding wily wits, and the same right quicke in the insight of our common lawes: in so much as it is counted, as well now, as in times past, the onely Country for best breed of Lawyers: so that even out of the meanest sort of the common people, there may be found not a few, who if there were nothing else to beare action, or able to fetch mat∣ter enough of wrangling controversies, even out of the very prickes, titles, and ac∣cents of the Law. But least, whiles I desire brevity, I become long by these digres∣sions which may distaste; I will turne my penne from the people to the places; and beginning at the South side, runne over briefly those which are more memorable, and of greater antiquity. Upon the least Ouse, where Thet a small brooke breaking out of Suffolke, meeteth and runneth with him, in a low ground, was seated that ancient City SITOMAGUS which Antonine the Emperour maketh mention of, corruptly in the Fragments of an old Choragraphicall table called SIMOMAGUS and SINOMAGUS now Thet∣ford, in the Saxon language in which remaineth part of the former name with the addition of the English word Ford. Sitomagus. Thetford. Magus. For, like as Sitomagus in the Brittish tongue implieth a Citie by the river Sit, which now is Thet for Magus as Plinie shew∣eth, signified a City) so Thetford in English betokeneth the Ford of Thet ; neither are these two names Sit and Thet much unlike in sound. There are in it at this day but few Inhabitants, although it be of a good bignesse; but in times past it was very po∣pulous; and beside other tokens of antiquity it hath still to bee seene a great Mount raised to a good height by mens hands; fensed with a double rampier, and as the re∣port goeth, fortified in ancient time with walles: which was a Romane worke as some thinke, or rather of the English Saxon Kings, as others would have it, under whom it flourished a long time. But after it was sacked, first by Suenus the Dane, who in a rage set it on fire in the yeere 1004; and sixe yeers after being spoyled againe by the furious Danes, it lost all the beauty and dignity that it had. For the recovery whereof, Bishop Arfast removed his Episcopall See from Elmham hither, and Bishop William his successor did all he could to adorne and set it out: so that, under King Edward the Confessour, there were counted in it 947. Burgesses, and in William the Conque∣rours time 720. Mansions: whereof 224. stood void, and the chiefe Magistrate was termed a Consul, which name may intimate that it was a Roman towne. But when Bishop Herbert (surnamed Losenga, for that he was composed of Leafing and Flattery ) the third Prelate that by evill meanes and Simony climbed up to this Dignity, had removed his seat from hence to Norwich, it fell againe to decay, and as it were lan∣guished. Neither could it sufficiently bee comforted for the absence of the Bishop, by the Abbay of Cluniac Monkes, which by his meanes was built. This Abbay, Hugh Bigod built out of the ground: For so writeth he in the Instrument of the foundation. I Hugh Bigod Steward to King Henry, by his graunt and by the advise of Herbert Bishop of Norwich, have ordained Monkes of the Order of Cluny, in the Church of S. Mary which was the Episcopall seat of Thetford, which I gave unto them, and afterwards founded another more meete for their use, without the Towne. Howbeit even then, the greatest part of the Citty that stood on the hithermore Banke by little and little fell to the ground: the other part although it was much decayed, yet one or two Ages agoe flourished with seaven Churches, besides three small religious Houses, whereof the one was, by report erected in the memoriall of the Englishmen and Danes slaine here. For hard by as our Historians doe record, Edmund that most holy King a litle before his death fought Seaven houres and more with the Danes not without an horrible slaughter, and afterwards gave over the battaile on even hand; such was the alterna∣tive fortune of the Field, that it drave both sides past their senses. By Waveney the other River of those twaine, that bound this Shire and runneth Eastward, not farre from the Spring head thereof, are seene Buckenham and Kening∣hall. This which may seeme to have the name left unto it of the Iceni, is the Seat of that most honourable Family of the Howards, whose glory is so great, that the envy of Bucchanan cannot empaire it. As for the other, so named, as I take it of Beech trees which the Saxons called Bucken ; it is a faire and strong Castle, built by William de Aubigny the Norman, (unto whom the Conqueror had given the place) and by his heires that were successively Earles of Arundell, it descended to the Tatsalls, and from them by Caly and the Cliftons unto the family of the Knevets. The Family of the Knevets. These are of an ancient house and renowned ever since Sir Iohn Knevet was Lord Chancellour of England under King Edward the Third, and also honourably allied by great marriages. For over and beside these of Buckenham, from hence sprang those right worshipfull knights, Sir Thomas Knevet Lord Knevet, Sir Henry Knevet of Wiltshire, and Sir Thomas Kne∣vet of Ashellwell Thorpe and others. This Ashellwell Thorpe is a little Towne nere adjoy∣ning, which from the Thorpes in times past of Knights degree, by the Tilneis and the L. L. Bourchiers of Berners, Barons Bour∣chiers of Ber∣ners. is devolved at length hereditarily unto that Sir Thomas Knevet before named. As for that Buckenham, aforesaid, it is holden by this tenure and condition, that the Lords thereof should at the Coronation of the Kings of England be the Kings Butlers that day. Like as, (a thing that may beseeme the noting) in Charle∣ton a little neighbour village, Raulph de Carleton and some one other, held lands by this service, namely, To present an hundred Herring-Pies or Pasties, when Herrings first come in, unto their Soveraigne Lord the King, wheresoever he be in England. But this river neare to his spring runneth by and by under Disce, now Dis, a prety towne well knowne; which King Henry the First gave frankely to Sir Richard Lucy, and hee straightwayes passed it over to Walter Fitz-Robert with his Daughter: of whose Posterity Robert Fitz-Walter obtained for this place the liberty of keeping Mercat, at the hands of King Edward the First. From thence, although Waveney bee on each side beset with Townes, yet there is not one amongst them that may boast of any Antiquity: unlesse it bee Harleston a good Mercate, and Shelton that standeth farther of, both which have given surnames to the ancient Families of the Sheltons and Harlestons: but before it commeth to the Sea, it coupleth it selfe with the river Yare, which the Britans called Guerne, the Englishmen Gerne, and Iere, of Alder trees, no doubt, so termed in British wherewith it is overshadowed. It ariseth out of the mids of this Countrie, not farre from Gernston a little Towne that tooke name there∣of, and hath hard by it Hengham, Hengham. Lord of Rhia. which had Lords, descended from Iohn Marescall (Nephew by the brother to William Marescall Earle of Penbroch ) upon whom King John bestowed it with the Lands of Hugh de Gornay, a Traitour, and also with the daughter and coheire of Hubert de Rhia. From this Marescals it passed in revolution of time, unto the Lord Morleis, and from them by Lovell unto the Parkers, now Lords Morley. A little from hence is Sculton, otherwise called Burdos or Burdelois, which was held by this Tenure, * That the Lord thereof on the Coronation day of the Kings of England, Sculton. Wood rising. should be chiefe Lardiner. Joint-neighbour to Sculton is Wood-Rising the faire seate of the Family of Southwels, which received the greatest reputation and en∣crease from Sir Richard Southwell Privie Councellour to King Edward the Sixth; and his Brother Sir Robert Master of the Rowles. More Eastward is to be seene Wimundham, Windham. now short, Windham, famous for the Al∣bineys Earles of Arundell, there enterred: whose Ancestor and Progenitor Willi∣am D' Albiney, Butler to King Henry the First founded the Priory, and gave it to the Abbay of Saint Albans for a Cell, which afterward was advanced to an Abbay. Upon the Steeple whereof, which is of a great height, William Ke one of the Cap∣taines of the Norfolke Rebels, in the yeare of our Lord 1549. was hanged on high. Neither would it bee passed over in silence, that five miles from hence stan∣deth Attilborrough, Attilborough. Mortimers. the seate of the Mortimers, an ancient Family, who being different from those of Wigmor, bare for their Armes, A Shield, Or, Semè de floures de Lyz Sables, and founded heere a Collegiat Church, where there is little now to bee seene. The Inheritance of these Mortimers hath by marriage long since accrued to the Ratcliffs, now Earles of Sussex, to the Family of Fitz-Ralph, and to Sir Ralph Bi∣got. But returne we now to the River. The said Yare holdeth not his course farre into the East, before he taketh Wentsum a Riveret (others call it Wentfar ) from the South, into his streame: upon which, neere unto the head thereof, there is a foure square Rampier at Taiesborrough, containing foure and twenty Acres. It may seeme to have beene a Campe place of the Ro∣mans, if it be not that which in an old Chorographicall Table or Map published by Marcus Welserus, is called AD TAUM. Somewhat higher, upon the same River, stood VENTA ICENORUM, the most flourishing City, (for a little one) in times past of all this people; Venta Iceno∣rum. Caster. but now having lost the old name, it is called Caster. And no mar∣vaile, that of the three VENTAE, Cities of Britain, this onely lost the name, see∣ing it hath quite lost it selfe. For, beside the ruines of the Walles, which containe within a square plot or quadrant, about thirty acres, and tokens appearing upon the ground where sometimes houses stood, and some few peeces of Romane money which are now and then there digged up, there is nothing at all remaining. But out of this ancient VENTA, in the succeeding ages, Norwich had her beginning, a∣bout three miles from hence, neere unto the confluents of Yare and another namelesse River (some call it Bariden ) where they meet in one: which River with a long course running in and out by Fakenham, which King Henry the first gave to Hugh Capell, and King John afterward to the Earle of Arundell ; and making many crooked reaches, speedeth it selfe this way by Attilbridge to Yare, Horsford. and leaveth Horsford North from it: where a Castle of William De Casineto. Cheneys, who in the Raigne of Henry the Second, was one of the great Lords and chiefe Peeres of England, lieth overgrowne with bushes and brambles. Norwich. Wic in the Saxons tongue what it signi∣fieth. This NORVVICH is a famous City, called in the English Saxon tongue , that is, a Northerly Creeke, if Wic among the Saxons signifieth the creeke or Cove of a River, as Rhenanus sheweth unto us: for, in this very place the River runneth downe amaine with a crooked and winding compasse: or, a Northerne Station, if Wic, as Hadrianus Iunius would have it, betokeneth a sure and secure station or place of a∣boad; where dwelling houses stand joyntly and close together: or a Northerly Castle, if Wic sound as much as Castle, as our In the Eng∣lish Saxon Grammer. Archbishop Alfrick the Saxon hath interpre∣ted it. But if I should with some others be of opinion that Norwich by a little tur∣ning is derived from Venta, what should I doe but turne awry from the very truth? For by no better right may it challenge unto it selfe the name of Venta, than either Ba∣sil in Germany, the name of AUGUSTA, or Baldach of BABYLON. For, like as Baldach had the beginning of Babylons fall; Augusta Ra ∣racorum. and Basil sprang from the ruine of Augusta: even so our Norwich appeared and shewed it selfe, though it were late, out of that ancient VENTA, which, the British name thereof Caer Guntum in Authours, doth prove: wherein, like as in the River Wentsum or Wentfar the name of Venta doth most plaine∣ly discover it selfe. For, this name Norwich wee cannot reade of any where in our Chronicles before the Danish warres. So farre is it off, that either Caesar or Guiteline the Britain built it, as they write who are more hasty to beleeve all than to weigh matters with sound judgement. But now, verily, by reason of the wealth, the number of Inhabitants, and resort of people, the faire buildings, and faire Churches, and those so many, (for it contai∣neth about thirty Parishes) the painefull industry of the Citizens, their loyalty towards their Prince, and their courtesie unto strangers, it is worthily to bee ran∣ged with the most celebrate Cities of Britaine. It is right pleasantly situate on the side of an Hill two and fifty Degrees and forty Scrupuls from the Aequator, and foure and twenty Degrees and five and fifty Scrupuls in Longitude. The forme is somewhat long: lying out in length from South to North a mile and an halfe: but carrying in breadth, about halfe so much, drawing it selfe in by little and little at the South end in manner, as it were, of a cone or sharpe point. Compassed it is about with strong walles (in which are orderly placed many Turrets, and twelve gates) un∣lesse it bee on the East-side; where the River (after it hath with many windings in and out watered the North part of the City, having foure Bridges for men to passe to and fro over it) is a Fence thereto, with his deepe Chanell there, and high steepe bankes. In the very infancy, as I may so say, of this City, when Etheldred a wit∣lesse and unadvised Prince raigned, Sueno or Swan the Dane who ranged at his pleasure through England with a great rable of spoiling Ravenours, first put it to the sacke, and afterwards set it on fire. Yet it revived againe, and as wee reade in that Domesday booke wherein William the Conquerour tooke the review of all England, there were by account in King Edward the Confessours time, no fewer than one thou∣sand three hundred and twenty Burgesses in it. At which time (that I may speake out of the same Booke) It paid unto the King twenty pounds and to the Earle ten pounds: and beside all this twenty shillings, and foure Prebendaries, and sixe Sextars of Hony; also a Beare and sixe Dogges for to bait the Beare: but now it paieth seventy pounds by weight to the King, and an hundred shillings for a Fine, as some take it. Gersume to the Queene, and an ambling Palfrey: also twenty pounds Blanc to the Earle, and twenty shillings for a Gersume by tale. But while the said King William raigned, that flaming fire of fatall sedition, which Raulph Earle of East England had kindled against the King, settled it selfe heere. For, when hee had saved himselfe by flight, his wife together with the French Britons endu∣red in this place a most grievous Siege even to extreme famine: yet at length dri∣ven she was to this hard pinch that she fled the land, and this City was so empaired, that scarce 560. Burgesses were left in it, as we reade in that Domesday booke. Of this yeelding up of the City Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury maketh mention in his Epistle to King William, in these words. Your Kingdome is purged of these villanous and filthy Britons, The Castle of Norwich is rendred up into your hands. And the Britons who were therein and had lands in England, having life and limme granted unto them, are sworne within forty dayes to depart out of your Realme, and not enter any more into it without your leave and licence. From that time beganne it againe to recover it selfe by little and little out of this diluge of calamities, and Bishop Herbert, whose good name was cracked for his foule Simony, translated the Episcopall See from Thetford hi∣ther, and built up a very faire Cathedral Church on the East side and lower part of the City, in a certaine place then called Cow-holme, neere unto the Castle. The first stone whereof in the Raigne of King William Rufus, and in the yeare after Christs Nativity 1096. himselfe laid, with this inscription. DOMINUS HERBERTUS POSUIT PRIMUM LAPIDEM IN NOMINE PATRIS, FILII, ET SPIRITUS SANCTI. AMEN. That is. LORD [BISHOP] HERBERT LAID THE FIRST STONE IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, THE SONNE, AND HOLY GHOST, AMEN. Afterwards, he procured of Pope Paschal that it should be established, and confir∣med for the Mother Church of Norfolke and Suffolke: he endowed it bountifully with as much lands, as might sufficiently maintaine threescore Monkes, who had there faire and spacious Cloysters. But after that they were thrust out by King Henry the Eight, there were substituted for them a Deane, sixe Prebendaries and others. The Church being thus built and an Episcopall See there placed, the Towne now (as saith William of Malmesbury ) became of great name for frequent trade of Merchants and resort of people. And in the 17. yeare of King Stephen, as we reade in old Annals, Norwich was founded a new, became a well peopled City, and was made a Corporation. And most certaine it is out of the kings Records, that king Stephen granted it unto his sonne William for his Appennage, as they terme it, or inheritance. Out of whose hands King Henry the Second shortly after wrested it by composition and kept it for him∣selfe: And albeit his Sonne Henry, called the younger King, when he aspired ambi∣tiously to the kingdome, had made a large promise thereof unto Hugh Bigod Earle of Norfolke whom hee had drawne to side with him. At which time Bigod taking part with the young King, who could not containe his hope of the Kingdome within the bounds of duty and equity, most grievously afflicted and oppressed this City: and then as it is thought reedified that Castle standing within the very City upon an high hill neere unto the Cathedrall Church, which being compassed with a ditch of a wonderfull depth seemed in those daies impregnable. Which notwithstanding, Lewis the French-man, with whom the seditious Barons of England combined against King John, won it easily by Siege. Now, that Bigod reedified this Castle I verily be∣leeve, because I have seen Lions Saliant engraven there in a Stone after the same forme that the Bigods used in times past in their Seales: of whom also there was one that in his Seale used a Crosse. These things fell out in the first age (we may say) of Norwich. But in the age next ensuing, it encreased mightily and flourished, by reason that the Citizens grew to be passing wealthy, who exhibited a supplication in the Parliament house unto King Edward the First, that they might be permitted to wall their City about, which they afterwards performed to the exceeding great strengthning and honor thereof. They obtained moreover of King Richard the Second, that the Wor∣sted made there might be transported: and in the yeare 1403. king Henry the fourth granted that they might choose every yeare a Major in stead of their Bailiffes, which before were the principall Magistrates. They built likewise a passing faire Towne-house in the very middest of the City neere unto the Mercat-place, which on certaine set dayes is furnished exceeding well with all things necessary for mans life. And verily much beholden it is unto the Or Dutch∣men of the Low countries. Netherlanders, that being weary of Duke de Alba his cruelty, and hating the bloudy Inquisition, repaired hither in great numbers and first brought in the making and trade of saies, baies, and other stuffes now much in use. But why should I stand long upon these things, when as Alexander Nevill a Gentleman well borne and very learned hath notably described all these matters, to∣gether with the story of their Bishops, the orderly succession of their Magistrates, and the furious outrage of that most villanous Rebell Ke against this City? This only will I adde, that in the yeare 1583. the Citizens conveighed water out of the River through pipes by an artificiall Instrument or water-forcer up into the highest places of the City. Heere I may justly commence an action both against Polydor Virgill an Italian, and also against Angelus Capellus a Frenchman, and put them to their answer before the Tribunal of venerable Antiquity, why they have avouched that the anci∣ent ORDOVICES, who be seated, as it were in another world, inhabited this Norwich. I would have the same mery action also against our Country man D. Caius, but that I know for certaine that the good old man, right learned though he were, was blinded in this point with the naturall love of this his own native Country. Neither have I more to say of Norwich unlesse it may please you to runne over these Verses of Master Iohn Ionston a Scottish-Britan written of the same. Vrbs speciosa situ, nitidis pulcherrima tectis, Grata peregrinis, delitiosa suis. Bellorum sedes, trepido turbante tumultu, Tristia Neustriaco sub duce damna tulit. Victis dissidijs, postquam caput ardua coelo Extulit, immensis crevit opima opibus. Cultus vincit opes, & cultum gratia rerum, Quam benè? si luxus non comitetur opes. Omnia sic adeò sola haec sibi sufficit, ut si Fors regno desit, haec caput esse queat. A City seated daintily, most faire built she is knowne, Pleasing and kinde to Strangers all, delightfull to her owne. The seat of warre whiles civill sturs and tumults yet remain'd, In William the Normans dayes, she grievous losse sustain'd, These broiles and jarres once past, when as her head aloft againe She bare, in richnesse infinite and wealth she grew amaine. Her Port exceeds that wealth, and things all superfine, this Port How happy were it, if excesse with such wealth did not sort. So all sufficient in her selfe, and so complete is shee, That if neede were, of all the Realme the Mistresse shee might bee. From Norwich, the River Yare having entertained other beackes and brookes as guests, yet all under his owne name, passeth on still with many winding crookes ve∣ry full of the fishes called Ruffes, A Ruffe. De Rariorum animatium, Historia. which name because in English it soundeth like to Rough, D. Caius named it aptly in Latine Aspredo, that is, Rough. For, it is all the body over, rough and hath very sharpe and pricky finnes: it delighteth in sandy pla∣ces; for shape and bignesse like unto a Perch; in colour browne and duskish above, but palish yellow beneath: marked by the chawes with a double course of half-cir∣cles: the eye for the upper halfe of it of a darke browne, for the nether somewhat yel∣lowish like delayed gold, the ball and sight thereof blacke. This speciall marke by it selfe it hath, that there is a line goeth along the backe, and fastened to the body (as it were) with an overthwart thred, all to bespotted ouer the taile and fins with blacke speckes: which finnes when the fish is angry stand up and bristle stiffe and strong: but when the anger is allayed they fall flat againe. The meat of this Ruffe resembleth that of the Perch, much commended for holsomnesse; and for eating tender and short. * When Y re is gone past Claxton, where there stands a Castlet built round, which Sir Thomas Gawdy knight Justice of the Common Pleas of late repaired, it receiveth a brooke which passeth by nothing memorable but Halles-hall, Halles-hall. and that only memorable for his ancient Owner Sir Iames Hobart Atturney Generall and of the Privie Counsell to King Henry the Seventh (by him dubbed Knight at such time as he created Henry his sonne Prince of Wales ) who by building from the ground the faire Church at Lod∣don being his Parish Church, Hobart. Saint Olaves bridge over Waveney that divideth Nor∣folke and Suffolke, the cawsey thereby, and other works of piety, deserved well of the Church, his Country, and the Common-weale, and planted three houses of his owne Issue, out of the second whereof Sir Henry Hobart his great Grandchilde now likewise Atturney Generall to King Iames is lineally descended. Now Yare approching neerer to the Sea, Garieni Ostium. Yarmouth. runneth downe Southward, that so it may shed it selfe more gently into the salt sea waves, and thereby maketh a little languet of land like a tongue thrust out, which it selfe of one side watereth, and the Sea on the other beateth upon. On this languet I saw standing in a most open plaine shore, Yarmouth, in the English-Sax∣on , and , that is, Yares-mouth, a very convenient Haven, and as faire a Towne, beautifully built and passing well fensed both by the naturall strength of the place and also by the skilfull industry of mans Art. For although it bee enviro∣ned almost round with Water, on the West side with the River which hath a Draw Bridge over it, and from other Partes with the Ocean, unlesse it bee Northward where there is firme land: yet is it in most sightly manner enclosed with a good strong wall, which together with the River make a square forme of foure sides, but somewhat long: upon which wall, beside Towres, there is cast a mount toward the East, from whence the great Peeces of Ordnance use to thunder and flash all about into the Sea under it, which is scarce 60. paces off. It hath indeed but one Church, yet the same is very large, having a passing high spire steeple to adorne it, built by Herbert Bishop of Norwich hard by the North gate: under which are to be seene the foundations brought above ground of a goodly peece of worke to enlarge the same. Garianon . That this was that old Towne GARIANONUM, where, in times past, the Stablesian Horsemen kept their standing watch and ward against the barbarous ene∣mies, I dare not affirme; neither doe I thinke that Garianonum was where Caster is now (in times past the faire seat of Sir Iohn Fastolfe, a most martiall knight, and now appertaining to the Pastons ) albeit it is much celebrated among the Inhabitants for the antiquity thereof, and the fame goeth that the River Yare had another mouth or passage into the Sea under it. But, as I am perswaded that GARIANONUM stood at Burgh-castle in Suffolke, which is on the other banke about two miles off, so I am easily induced to thinke, that both Yarmouth arose out of the ruines thereof, and also that the said Caster was one of the Roman Forts, placed also upon the mouth of Yare, that now is stopped up. For, like as the Caurus. North Westerne Winde doth play the Tyrant upon Holland over against it, and by drift of Shelves and Sand-heapes hath choked the mid∣dest of the Rhene-mouthes: even so the Aquilo. North-East Winde afflicteth and annoi∣eth this Coast, and driveth the sand on heapes, so as it may seeme to have dammed up this mouth also. Neither will it be prejudiciall to the Truth, if I should name our Yarmouth, GARI∣ANONUM, being so neere adjoyning as it is, unto the old Garianonum: considering that Gorienis the River, whence it tooke the name, having now changed his chanell, en∣treth into the maine Sea a little beneath this Towne, which it hath also given name unto: For, I must needs confesse, that this our Yarmouth is of later memory. For, when that ancient Garianonum aforesaid was decayed, and there was no Garrison to defend the Shore, Cerdicus the Saxon. Cerdick sand. Cerdick a warlike Saxon landed here (whereupon the Inhabitants at this day call the place Cerdick-sand, and the Writers of Histories, Cerdick-shore ) and after hee had made sore war upon the Iceni, tooke Sea and sailed from hence into the West parts, where he erected the Kingdome of the West Saxons. And not long af∣ter, the Saxons in stead of Garianonum, founded a new Towne in that moist and wate∣rish ground, neer the West side of the River and named it Yarmouth: But finding the Situation thereof not to be healthfull, they betooke themselves to the other side of the River called then of the same Cerdicke, Cerdick-sand, and built this new Towne, in which there flourished in King Edward the Confessour his daies 70. Burgesses, William Worcester. as wee finde recorded in the Domesday booke. Notitia of England. After this, about the yeare of our Redemption 1340. the Townesmen strengthned it with a wall, and in short space it grew so rich and puissant, that oftentimes in seafights they set upon their neighbors of Lestoffe, yea and the Portuenses. Portmen, for so termed they the Inhabitants of the Cinque Ports, not without much bloud shed on both sides. For they were most spitefully bent against them, haply for being excluded out of the number of the Cinque Ports, and deprived of these priviledges which old Garianonum or Yarmouth, and their Ancestours, enjoyed under the Lieutenant. Comes of the Saxon Shore in elder times. But this their stoutnesse was repressed at length and taken downe by the Kings Au∣thority: or as some thinke, their lusty courage became abated by that most grievous and lamentable plague, which in one yeare, within this one little Towne brought 7000. to their graves. The which is witnessed by an ancient Latine Chronographicall Table hanging up in the Church, wherein are set downe also their warres with the Portmen and Lestoffians aforesaid. Since that time, their hearts have not beene so haughty, nor their wealth so great, Hertings. to make them bold: howbeit painfully they follow the trade of Merchandise, and taking of Halecum. Herrings (which the learned thinke to bee Chalcides and Leucomae∣wides ) a kinde of fish more plentifull heere than in any other Coast of the world a∣gaine. For, it may seeme incredible how great a Faire, and with what resort of people, is holden heere at the Feast of Saint Michael, and what store of Herrings and other fish is then bought and sold. Portuenses. At which time, they of the Cinque Ports abovesaid by an old order and custome, appoint their Bailiffs, Commissioners, and send them hither, who, that I may speake out of their owne Patent or Commission, together with the Magistrates of this Towne, during the time of the free Faire, hold a Court, for matters concerning the Faire, doe execute the Kings Iustice, and keepe the Kings peace. As for the Haven below the Towne, it is very commodious both for the inhabitants, and for Norwich-men also: but for feare that it should be barred and stop∣ped up, they wrestle as it were, to their great cost and charges, with the maine Sea: which to make them amends and to restore what it hath eaten and swallowed up elsewhere in this Shore, hath by heaping of earth and sand together, cast up here of late a prety Island. The river Thyrn. At this mouth also, another River, which some call Thyrn sheddeth it selfe toge∣ther with Yare into the sea: This River springing up neere unto Holt a towne so called of an Holt or tuft of trees, and for the Mercat well knowne, running about five miles distant from Yare, Blickling. holdeth on a joynt course a great way and keepeth pace with him, by Blickling, Ailesham. now the seat of the ancient Family of Clere who in former times dwelt at Ormesby ; * and by Ailesham a Mercat Towne of good resort, where the Earle of Athole in Scotland had lands not farre from Worsted, Worsted. Worsted Stuffe. whereas I reade, the Stuffe Worsted, in so great request amongst our Ancestours, was first made; and hence so named, as Dornicks, Cameric, Calecut, &c. had in like manner their denomination from the places where they were first invented, Saint Benets in the Holme. and made. Then passeth Thyrn nere the decayed great Abbay called Saint Benet in the Holme: which Knut the Dane built, and the Monkes afterward so strengthned with most strong wals and bulwarks, that it seemed rather a Castle than a Cloister. In so much, that William the Con∣querour could not winne it by assault, untill a Monke betraied it into his hands upon this condition, that himselfe might bee made Abbot thereof. Which was done ac∣cordingly: but forthwith, this new Abbot for being a Traitour, (as the Inhabitants make report) was hanged up by the Kings commandement, and so justly punished for this treason. But the ground in this Island or Holme is so fenny and rotten, that if a man cut up the strings and rootes of trees, and shrubs there growing, it floteth a∣loft on the water, and is ready to follow one whither he will have it. And some there be who thinke, by the Perwinkles and Cocles that other while are digged up there; that the Sea had broken in thither. Ludham. Clipsby. From thence runneth this River downe by Lud∣ham, an house of the Bishops of Norwich, and by Clipsby, which gave name to a Fami∣ly of ancient note in his Tract, and straightway uniteth his owne streame with the Yare. From the mouth of Yare the shore goeth directly (as it were) North, to Winterton a point or cape very well knowne to Sailers, which tooke that name, I suppose, of the cold and winterly Situation. For, it lieth full upon the Ocean, the father of windes and cold, A most fat and battle ground. who with exceeding violence rusheth against the bankes and piles that are opposed against him. Howbeit, the Country adjoyning round about, in many mens opinion hath the fattest Soile and softest mould of any country in all England, as which asketh least labour, and yeeldeth most fruit. For, with a silly jade, (as Plinie wri∣teth of Bizacium in Africke ) and a poore old woman at one side of the yoake draw∣ing the plough, it is easily broken up, and eared. From Winterton immediately the shore turning Westward, the sea retireth, without any bearing out in manner at all, along a flat and low coast, as farre as to Eccles, which is almost overflowed and drowned with the Ocean. Bronholme. From thence it carrieth an higher shore, by Bronholme sometime a Priory founded and enriched by G. Glanvill, and seated upon the sharpe top of an hill, the Crosse whereof our ancestours had in holy reverence, * I know not for what miracles. Next it is Paston a small townlet which yet hath given sirname to a Family growne great, Paston. Gimmingham. both in Estate and alliance, since they matched with an Heiresse of Beary and Maultbye. Not far hence is Gimmingham, which with other Manors, John Earle of Warren and Surrie gave in times past to Thomas Earle of Lancaster, and by Cro∣mer where the neighbour Inhabitants with great expense went about to make an Havenet, but to small purpose, the Ocean so furiously played the Tyrant and made resistance. Wauburne▪ Thence the Shore runneth forth to Wauburne-hope ; a Creeke fortified in our time, so called of Wauburne a little Towne, unto which by the intercession of Oliver de Burdeaux, King Edward the Second granted the Liberty of keeping a Mercat: Blackney. Next unto it is Clay, and over against it with a little River running be∣tweene, Blackney, 1321. our Country man Bale calleth it Nigeria, a famous House of Carmelite Friers in this late age afore going, John Bacon∣thorp. built by Sir Robert de Roos, Sir Ro∣bert Bacon, and John Bret : out of which came John Baconthorp, so named of the place of his nativity, (which now is the habitation of the Heidons, an ancient Race of Knights degree) A man in that age of such variety and depth withall of excellent learning, that hee was had in exceeding great admiration among the Italians, and commonly called The Resolute Doctor. The Resolute Doctor. Whence it is, that Paulus Pansa thus wri∣teth of him. If thy minde stand to enter into the secret power of the Almighty and most mercifull God, no man hath written of his Essence more exactly. If any man desireth to learne the causes of things, or the effects of Nature; if hee wish to know the sundry motions of Heaven, and the contrary qualities of the Elements, this man offereth himselfe as a store-house to furnish him: The Armour of Christian Religion, of better proofe and defence than those of Vulcans making against the Iewes, this resolute Doctour alone hath delivered, &c. When you are past Wauburne, the Coast lieth more low and flat, as farre as to Saint Edmunds Point, cut through and distinguished with many a rillet, and hardly defen∣ded from the injury of the Sea by heapes of sand which they use to call Meales, Meales o Miles. opposed against it. More within the Country is Walsingham scarce foure miles from hence: Walsingham. where∣upon it is that of the vicinity unto the Sea Erasmus calleth it Parathalassia. Very famous now is this Village by reason of the best Saffron growing there: but of late time as much renowned through all England for a Pilgrimage to our Ladie the Vir∣gin Mary: whom hee who had not in that former Age visited and presented with offerings, was reputed irreligious. But this shall Erasmus an eye-witnesse describe in his owne very words. Not farre from the Sea, (saith hee) about foure miles, there stan∣deth a Towne living almost of nothing else but upon the resort of Pilgrimes. There is a Col∣ledge of Chanons, Regulares. yet such, as unto whom the Latinists have given the addition of Regulares, a middle kinde betwixt Monkes and those Chanons whom they terme Secular: This Colledge hath scarce any other Revenewes than from the liberality of the said Virgin. For certaine of the greater Presents and Oblations are layed up and preserved. But if there be any money offe∣red or ought else, of small value, that goeth unto the maintenance of the Covent, and their Head or President, whom they call Prior. The Church is faire and neat; yet in it the Vir∣gin dwelleth not: that honour forsooth, shee hath done unto her Sonne: shee hath her Church by her selfe, but so, as that shee may bee on the right hand of her Sonne. Neither doth shee dwell heere for all this, for why, the Building is not yet finished, and the place hath a through light and ayre on all sides, with open doores and wide open windowes; the Ocean Sea withall, the father and foster of windes is hard by. In that Church, which I said was unfinished, there is a small Chappell, but all of wood, whereinto on either side at a narrow and little Doore are such admitted as come with their Devotions and Offerings. Small light there is in it, and none other in manner but by tapers or wax-candles, yeelding a most dainty and pleasant smell. Nay if you looke into it, you would say it were the Habitation of heavenly Saints in∣deed, so bright shining it is all over with pretious Stones, with Gold and Silver. But with∣in the memory of our fathers, when King Henry the Eighth had set his minde and eye both, upon the Riches and Possessions of Churches, all this vanished quite a∣way. Touching Walsingham, I have nothing else to say more, but that the Family of the Walsinghams, Knights (as they will have it that curiously search after Ge∣nealogies) fetched first their name and Originall from hence: Out of which house flourished that Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary unto Queene Elizabeth, a man as of deepe insight, so also of as rare and painfull industry in the weightiest affaires of the Realme. Houghton. The Neirfords. But hard by it at Houghton, flourished sometime the noble Family of the Neirfords, who by matching in marriage with Petronillae Va lx. Parnel de Vallibus (who had about Holt, Cley, and elsewhere a goodly Inheritance) was greatly enriched. But now let us looke backe againe to the Shore. Neere unto Walsingham Westward, upon the Sea side, was that ancient Towne BRANNODUNUM, Brannodunum. where when the Saxons first molested Britaine with their In∣vasions, The Dalmatian Horsemen lay in Garrison under the Lieutenant of the Saxon Shore. But now it is a country Village, reteining nought but the remaines of that name, and shewing a Trench and Rampire (the neighbour Inhabitants call it the Castle) that containeth within it a plot of ground much about eight Acres, and is named Brancaster, Brancastor. where peeces of Romane money are many times gotten out of the earth. Very commodiously was there a Garrison planted in this place: for at S. Edmunds Chappell neere adjoyning, Hunstanton. and Hunstanton, built by that holy King Saint Edmund, the coast draweth backe into the South, and so admitteth a larger creeke for the Sea to enter into, lying open for Pirats, into which many Rivers also doe void them∣selves. As for Hunstanton, it is to be remembred in this regard, if there were nothing else, Le Strange. for that it hath beene the Habitation of the Family of Le Strange, Knights by degree, ever since that in the Raigne of Edward the Second, Iohn Baron Le Strange of Knockin, gave the same unto Hamon his younger Brother. The catching of Hawkes, and the plentifull fishing, the Ieat and Amber also found oftentimes in this Shore I wittingly omit, seeing that there is great store of these things else where along this Tract. Sharnborn. Yet Sharnborn in this Coast is not to be omitted both for that Foelix the Burgundian who brought these East Englishmen to the Chri∣stian Faith and state of perpetuall Felicity, Foelix a Bi∣shop. built in this place the second Church of Christians in this Country (for the first, he founded at Babingley where he landed) as also because it is verily thought and that by the faithfull testimony of old deeds and evidences, that an old Englishman Lord of this place before the comming of the Normans, by vertue of sentence given judicially in open Court by William Conque∣rour himselfe, recovered this Lordship against Warren, unto whom the Conquerour had given it. Which argument they enforce hard, who would prove that the said William entred upon the Possession of England by Covenant and agreement, and not by right of warre and Conquest. The Washes. Mecaru Aestu∣arium. The foresaid Creeke or Bay, our Country men call the Washes, Ptolomee termed it AESTUARIUM METARIS, haply for Malthraith, by which name the Britains cal∣led the like Frithes and Armes of the Sea in other places: neither doth it signifie a∣mong them any other thing than an Arme of the Sea uncertainly changing the chanell such as this is: Upon this, where the River Ouse striveth forcibly against the Ocean, Lynne. standeth Linne, peradventure so named of the waters broad spreading; For that doth Lhyn import in the Wel h. British tongue. A large Towne this is, encompassed with a deepe trench and wals for the most part thereof, divided by two small Rivers that have fifteene bridges or thereabout over them: and although it be of no great an∣tiquity and not long since called Linnum Episcopi, that is, Bishops Linne, because it ap∣pertained to the Bishops of Norwich, untill King Henry the Eighth his daies, for it had beginning out of the ruines of an elder Towne which stood over against it in Marshland, and is at this day called Old Linne and Linnum Regis, that is, Kings Linne ; yet by reason of the safe Haven which yeeldeth most easie accesse, for the number al∣so of Merchants there dwelling, and thither resorting, for the faire and the goodly houses, the wealth also of the townesmen, it is doubtlesse the principall towne of this Shire except Norwich onely. It hath likewise most large franchises and immunities, which the Inhabitants bought with their owne bloud of King John, whiles they tooke part with him and defended his quarrell, who ordained there a Major, and delivered unto them his owne sword to be carried before him, yea and gave unto them a silver cup all gilt▪ which they still doe keep. These their liberties being afterwards lost, they redeemed not without bloud also, of King Henry the Third, when siding with him and serving under his Banner, they fought an unfortunate battaile against the out∣lawed Lords in the Isle of Ely, as the booke of Ely and Mathew Paris doe both joyntly witnesse. Over against Linne, on the farther side of the River lieth Mershland, a little moist mersh country, as the name implieth, divided and parted every where with ditches, trenches and furrowes to draine and draw the waters away: a soile standing upon a very rich and fertile mould, and breeding abundance of cattell: in so much as that in a place commonly called Tilneysmeth there feed much about 30000. sheepe: but so subject to the beating, and overflowing of the roaring maine Sea, which very often breaketh, teareth, and troubleth it so grievously, that hardly it can be holden off with chargeable wals and workes. The places of greater note in this Mersh∣land, are these: Walpole, which the Lord of the place gave in times past unto the Church of Ely together with his sonne, whom he had made a Monke there: Wigen∣hall, the possession of I. Howard in the Raigne of Edward the First, whose Posterity spred, and became a most honorable and noble Family, whereof I have already spo∣ken: Tilney, Tilney. whence in old time the stocke of the Tilneys, Knights, tooke name; and Saint Maries the seat of the ancient race of the Carvils. S. Maries. Now have we passed along all the Sea-coast. As for the inner part of the Country, there are also very many Townes toward the West side, but because they bee of later memory, I will briefly runne them over. Neere to Linne upon an high hill standeth Rising-castle, almost marchable to the Castle of Norwich ; the seat in times past of the Albineys ; afterwards of Robert de Monthault, by one of the sisters and coheires of Hugh Albiney Earle of Arundell ; and at last the mansion place of the Mowbrays: who, as I have learned, came out of the same house that the Albineys did. But now, after long languishings, as it were, by reason of old age, the said Castle hath given up the ghost. Below it is Castle-acre, where was sometimes the habitation of the Earles of Warren, in a Castle now halfe downe, on a little Rivers side: which carrying no name, ariseth not farre from Godwicke a lucky good name, where there stands a small house, but greatly graced by the Lord thereof, Sir Edward Coke Knight, a man of rare endowments of nature, and as in the Common lawes much practised, so of deepe in∣sight therein, which all England both tooke knowledge of whiles hee discharged the function of Atturney Generall many yeares most learnedly, and now acknow∣ledgeth whiles being Lord Chiefe Justice of the Common Pleas, he administreth ju∣stice as uprightly and judiciously. Neither is he lesse to be remembred, for that he loveth learning, and hath well deserved of the present and succeeding ages by his learned labours. Reports. This Riveret or brooke with a small streame and shallow water runneth Westward to Linne, Neirford. by Neirford, that gave name to the Family of the Neirfords famous in times past, and by Neirborrough: where neere unto the house of the Spilmans, knights, upon a very high hill is to be seene a warlike Fort of passing great strength and of ancient worke, so situated, as it hath a very faire prospect into the Country about it. After, upon the said Brooke is seated Penteney, a prety Abbay, the ordinary buriall place in ancient time of the Noblemen and Gentlemen in this Tract. Neere unto it lieth Wormegay, Wormegay. commonly Wrongey, which Reginald de Warren bro∣ther of William de Warren the second Earle of Surry had with his wife, of whom as I have read, the said Earle had the donation or Maritagium (as they use to speake in the law phrase) and by his sonnes daughter streightwayes it was transferred to the Bar∣dolphs, Bardolphs Barons. who being Barons of great nobility, flourished a long time in honorable state, and bare for their Armes Three Cinque-foiles or in a Shield Az r, The greatest part of whose Inheritance together with the Title came to Sir William Phellips, and by his daughter passed away to the Vicount Beaumont. More Eastward are seated, Swaffham a Mercat Towne of good note, sometime the Possession of the Earle of Richmond: Ashele Manour, by Tenure whereof the Hastings and Greies Lords of Ruthin had the charge of table clothes and linnen used at the solemne Coronation of the Kings of England: North Elmham, the Bishops See for a good time, when as this Province was divided into two Dioceses: Dereham, wherein Withburga King Annas daugh∣ter was buried: whom because shee was piously affected, farre from all riotous ex∣cesse, and wanton lightnesse, our Ancestours accounted for a Saint. Next unto which is Greshenhall, Greshenhall. Elsing. Folliots. and adjoyning thereto Elsing, the possessions in ancient time of the Folliots, men of great worth and Dignity, which in right of dowry came by a daughter of Richard Folliot to Sir Hugh de Hastings, descended out of the Family of Abergevenny: and at length by the daughters and heires of Hastings the last, Greshenhall aforesaid fell unto Sir Hamon le Strange of Hunstanton, and Elsing unto William Browne the brother of Sir Antonie Browne the first Vicount Mount-acute. In this quarter also is Ick-borrough, Ickborrough. Iciani. which Talbot supposeth to have beene that ICIANI, whereof Antonine speaketh. Neither have I cause to write any more of these pla∣ces. And now I thinke it is good time to set downe the Earles and Dukes of North∣folke, that I may proceed to Cambridgeshire. Earles and Dukes of Norfolke. William the Conquerour made one Raulph Governour of East-England, that is to say, of Norfolke, Suffolke, and Cambridgeshire, who forthwith gaping as I said, after an alteration and change in the State, was dispossessed of that place. After certaine yeares, in the Raigne of Stephen, Hugh Bigod was Earle of Norfolke: For, when peace was concluded betweene Stephen and Henry Duke of Anjou, Composition betwixt King Stephen and Henry Duke of Anjou. who became after∣wards King Henry the second, by expresse words it was provided, that William King Stephens sonne should have the whole Earledome of Norfolke, excepting among o∣ther things, The third peny of that County, whereof Hugh Bigod was Earle. Whom notwithstanding King Henry the Second created Earle againe, of the third peny of Norfolke and Norwich. Who dying about the 27. yeare of Henry the Second, Roger his sonne succeeded, who, for what cause I know not, obtained at the hands of King Richard the first a new Charter of his creation: Him succeeded his sonne Hugh, who tooke to his wife Mawde the eldest daughter and one of the heires of William Mares∣call Earle of Pembroch. By whom he had issue one sonne named Roger, Earle of Nor∣folke and Marescall of England, who at Tournament having his bones put out of joint, died without issue: and another, called Hugh Bigod Lord chiefe Justice of Eng∣land slaine in the battaile of Lewis: whose sonne Roger succeeded his Uncle in the Earldome of Norfolke and dignity of Marescall: but having incurred through his in∣solent contumacy the high displeasure of King Edward the First, was compelled to passe away his honors and well neere his whole inheritance into the Kings hands to the use of Thomas of Br therton the Kings son, whom he had begotten of his second wife Margaret sister to Philip the Faire, King of France. For thus reporteth the Hi∣story, out of the Library of Saint Austens in Canterbury. In the yeare 1301. Roger Bigod Earle of Norfolke ordained King Edward to bee his heire: and hee delivered into his hands the rod of the Marshals Office with this condition, that if his wife brought him any chil∣dren, he should without all contradiction receive againe all from the King and hold it peacea∣bly as before: and the King gave unto him a 1000. pounds in money, and a thousand pound land during his life, together with the Marshalship, and the Earldome. But when he was departed this life without issue, King Edward the Second, honoured the said Tho∣mas of Brotherton his brother, according to the conveiance aforesaid, with the Ti∣tles of Marshall and Earle of Norfolke. Parliament 21. Richard. 2. Whose daughter Margaret called Marshallesse and Countesse of Norfolke wife to Iohn Lord Segrave, king Richard the Second cre∣ated in her absence Dutchesse of Norfolke for terme of life: and the same day crea∣ted Thomas Mowbray the daughters sonne of the said Margaret, then Earle of Noting∣ham, the first Duke of Norfolke, To him and his heires males ; unto whom he had like∣wise granted before the State and stile of Earle Marshall of England. This is hee, that before the king was challenged and accused by Henry of Lan∣caster Duke of Hereford, for uttering inconsiderately certaine reprochfull, and dero∣gatory words against the king. And when they were to fight a combat, at the very barre and entry of the Lists, by the voice of an Herauld it was proclaimed in the kings name, That both of them should be banished, Lancaster for ten yeares, and Mowbray for ever: who afterwards ended his life at Venice, leaving two sonnes behind him in England. Of which, Thomas Earle Marshall and of Nottingham, for no other Ti∣tle used hee, was beheaded for seditious plotting against Henry of Lancaster, who now had possessed himselfe of the Crowne by the name of King Henry the Fourth. But his brother and heire John, who through the favour of King Henry the Fifth was raised up, and for certaine yeares after called onely Earle Marshall and of Not∣tingham, at last in the very beginning of Henry the Sixth his Raigne, Rot. Parl. 3. Hen. 6. By authority of Parliament and by vertue of the Patent granted by King Richard the Second, was declared, Duke of Norfolke, as being the sonne of Thomas Duke of Norfolke his father, and heire to Thomas his brother. After him succeeded John his sonne, who died in the first yeare of Edward the Fourth: and after him likewise John his sonne, who whiles his father lived was created by King Henry the Sixth Earle of Surry and of Warren. Whose onely daughter Anne, Richard Duke of Yorke, the young sonne of King Edward the Fourth tooke to wife, and together with her received of his father the Titles of Duke of Norfolke, Earle Marshall, Earle of Warren and Nottingham. But after that he and his wife both were made away in their tender yeares, Richard the Third, King of England conferred this Title of the Duke of Norfolke, and the dig∣nity of Earle Marshall upon John Lord Howard, who was found next cozen in bloud and one of the heires to the said Anne Dutchesse of Yorke and Norfolke ; as whose mother was one of the daughters of that first Thomas Mowbray Duke of Nor∣folke, and who in the time of King Edward the Fourth was summoned a Baron to the Parliament. This John lost his life at Bosworth field, fighting valiantly in the quar∣rell of King Richard, against King Henry the Seventh. His sonne Thomas, who being by King Richard the Third created Earle of Surry, and by King Henry the Seventh made Lord Treasurer, was by King Henry the Eighth restored to the Title of Duke of Norfolke, and his sonne the same day created Earle of Surry: after that by his conduct, James the fourth, King of the Scots was slaine, and the Scottish po∣wer vanquished at Branxton. Floddon field. In memoriall of which Victory the said King granted to him and his heires males for ever, that they should beare in the midst of the Bend in the Howards Armes, the whole halfe of the upper part of a Lion Geules, pierced through the mouth with an arrow, in the due colours of the Armes of the King of Scots. I translate it verbatim out of the Patent. After him succeeded his sonne Thomas as well in his honours, as in the Office of Lord Treasurer of England, and lived to the time of Queene Mary, tossed to and fro betweene the reciprocall ebbes and flowes of for∣tune, whose grand sonne Thomas (by his sonne Henry, the first of the English No∣bility that did illustrate his high birth with the beauty of learning) being attainted for purposing a marriage with Mary the Queene of Scots, See in the Ada∣ges of Hadria∣nus Junius, A∣chilleum Vo∣ um. lost his life in the yeare of our Lord 1572. and was the last Duke of Norfolke. Since which time his off∣spring lay for a good while halfe dead: but now watered and revived with the vi∣tall dew of King James, reflourisheth very freshly. In this Province there be Parish Churches about 660. CAMBRIDGE Comitatus quem olim ICENI Insederunt CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE. C AMBRIDGE-SHIRE, called in the English-Saxon lyeth more inward, and stretched out in length Northward. On the East it butteth upon Northfolke and Suf∣folke, on the South upon the East-Saxons or Essexe, and Hert∣fordshire, on the West upon Bedford and Huntingdon shires, and Northward upon Lincoln-shire: being divided into two parts by the river Ouse which crosseth it over-thwart from West to East. The lower and South-part is better manured, and therefore more plentifull, being some-what a plaine, yet not altogether levell, for the most part or all of it rather (save onely where it bringeth forth saffron) is laid out into corne fields, and yeeldeth plentifully the best barly; of which steeped in water and lying wet therein untill it spurt againe, then after the said sprout is full come, dried and parched over a Kill, they make Byne Mault. store of mault: By venting and sending out whereof into the neighbor-coun∣tries, the Inhabitants raise very great gaine. The farther and Northerne part, be∣cause it is Fennish ground, by reason of the many flouds that the rivers cause, and so dispersed into Islands, is called The Isle of Ely, a tract passing greene, fresh and gay by reason of most plenteous pastures: howbeit after a sort hollow, by occasion of the water that in some places secretly entreth in; yea and otherwhile when it over∣floweth, surroundeth most part of it. Along the West side of the lower part runneth one of the two highwayes made by the Romans, ( Ely booke calleth it Ermingstreet ) which passeth forth right to H ntingdon through Roiston, Roiston. See in Hert∣fordshire, Caxton. that standeth in the very edge and entry of the Shire, a towne well knowne, yet but of late built, whereof I have already spoken: also by Caxton, in times past the seate of the Barony of Stephen de Eschal ers, and from whose Posterity in the reigne of King Henry the Third it descended to the Frevills, and from them by the Burgoins to the Iermins. Neither is Gamlinghay far distant from hence, where dwelt the Avenells, whose Inheritance came by marriage to the anci∣ent Family of Saint George, (out of which there flourished many Knights since the time of King Henry the First) at Hatley, Hatley Saint George. which of them is called Hatley Saint George. Above Caxton before mentioned is Eltesley, where was in elder Ages a Religious house of Holy Virgines, among whom was celebrated the incertaine memory of Saint Pandionia the daughter of a Scottish King, * as the tradition is. But long since they were translated to Hinchinbroke. And againe above Eltesley, was the Priory of Swasey founded for blacke Monkes by Alan la Zouch brother to the Vicount of Ro∣han in the Lesser Britaine, and was the common Sepulture a long time for the Family of Zouch. More Westward a little river runneth through the middle of this part, which is∣suing downe out of Ashwel, hastneth from South to North with many turnings, to joyn it selfe with the Ouse, Shengay. A Comman∣dery. running by Shengay (where be the goodliest medows of this Shire) a Commandery in old time of the Knights Templars ; which Shengay, Sibyl the daughter of Roger Mont-gomery Earle of Shrewsbury, and wife of I. de Raines gave unto them in the yeere 1130. nor farre from Burne Castle, Burne. Barones de Burne. in ancient times the Barony of Picot Sheriffe of this Shire, and of the Peverels, from whom by one of the daughters, this and other Possessions came unto Sir Gilbert Pech: the last of whose house, after he had otherwise advanced his children by his second wife, Barnwell Historie. The King heire to private persons. ordained King Edward the First, to be his Heire. For, in those dayes the Noble men of England brought into use againe the custome of the Romanes under their Emperours, which was to no∣minate them their heires, if they were in any disfavour with their Soveraignes. But in the Barons warre in King Henrie the Third his dayes, this Castle was burnt downe, being set on fire by Ribald L' Isle: At which time Walter de Cottenham a respective person, was hanged for Rebellion. By what name writers termed this River, it is a question: some call it Granta, others Camus. And unto these I rather incline: both for that the course thereof is somewhat crooked; for, so much doth Cam in the British tongue signifie, whence a certaine crooked river in Cornwall is named Camel ; and also because that ancient towne CAMBORITUM, Camboritum. which Antonine the Emperour mentioneth in his third journey of Britaine, stood upon this river as I am well neere induced to beleeve, by the distance, by the name, and also by the peeces of Romane mony found here nigh unto the bridge in great store. For, CAMBORITUM, signifieth A Fourd at Camus, or a Fourd with crooked windings. Rith what it signifieth in British and French. For Rith in our British or Welsh tongue betokeneth A Fourd, which I note to this end, that the Frenchmen may more easily perceive and see what is the meaning of Augustoritum, Darioritum, Rithomagus, and other such like in France. Howbeit the Saxons chuse rather to call our Camboritum, and , Grantcester. which name it keepeth still: but whence it was deri∣ved, I cannot yet see. If I should fetch it from Gron a Saxon word that signifieth a Fenny place, I might perhaps goe wide: And yet Asserius termed once or twice, certaine fennish and marish grounds in Somersetshire, by a mungrell name halfe Saxon and halfe Latine, Gronnas paludosissimas : and very well knowne it is, that a City in West Frisland, which is situate in such a ground is named Groningen. But let other hunt after the derivation of this name. About the yeere of Christ 700. this was a little desolate Citty, as saith Bede, whiles hee reporteth that neere unto the walles, there was found a little trough or coffin, very cunningly and finely wrought of Marble, and covered most fitly with a lidde of the like stone. But now a small Village it is: one part whereof Henry Lacie Earle of Lincolne gave unto his base sonne Henry, with this condition, that his sonnes and their posterity (which a good while since be cleane worne out) should have no other Christian name but Henry: the other part, Henry the Sixth King of England comming out of the house of Lancaster, into whose hands the Patrimony of Earle Lacie fell, graunted unto the Kings Colledge in Cambridge: Cambridge. which was either a part or else a plant of that anci∣ent Camboritum, so neere it commeth unto it both in situation and name. Neither can I easily beleeve, that Grant was turned into Cam ; for this might seeme a defle∣xion some what too hardly streined, wherein all the letters but one are quite swal∣lowed up. I would rather thinke that the common people reteined the terme of the ancient name of Camboritum or of the river Cam, although writers used more often the Saxon name Grantbridge. This Citty which being the other University of Eng∣land, the other eye, the other strong-stay, as it were, thereof, and a most famous Mart and store-house of good Literature and Godlines, standeth upon the river Cam, which after it hath in sporting wise besprinkled the West side thereof with many Islets, turning into the East, divideth it into two parts, and hath a Bridge over it, whence arose this latter name Cambridge. Beyond the bridge is seene a large and ancient Castle, which seemeth now to have lived out his full time, nigh Maudlen Col∣ledge. On this side the Bridge, where standeth the greatest part by farre of the City, you have a pleasant sight every where to the eye, what of fair streets orderly raunged, what of a number of Churches, and of sixteene Colledges, sacred mansions of the Muses, wherein a number of great learned men are maintained, and wherein the knowledge of the best Arts, and the skill in tongues so flourish, that they may be rightly counted the fountaines of Literature, Religion, and all Knowledge whatso∣ever, who right sweetly bedew and sprinkle, with most holesom waters the gardens of the Church and Common-wealth through England. Neither is there wanting any thing here, that a man may require in a most flourishing Vniversity, were it not that the ayre is somewhat unhealthfull arising as it doth out of a fenny ground hard by. And yet peradventure they that first founded an University in that place, allowed of Platoes judgement. For, he being of a very excellent and strong constitution of body chose out the Academia, an unwholsome place of Attica, for to study in, that so the superfluous ranknesse of body which might overlay the minde, might be kept under by the distemperature of the place. Neverthelesse, for all this, our forefathers, men of singular wisedome dedicated this place, and not without divine direction unto learned Studies, and beautified it with notable workes and buildings. And least we should seeme in the worst-kinde unthankefull to those singular Pa∣trons of learning, or rather that I may use the words of Eumenius, toward the Pa∣rents of our Children: Colledges. let us summarily rehearse both themselves, and the Colledges also which they founded and consecrated to good Literature, to their honourable memory, and that out of the Cambridge Story. The report goeth, that Cantaber a Spa∣niard, 375. yeeres before the Nativity of Christ, first began and founded this Uni∣versity: Also that Sebert King of the East-Angles restored it againe in the yeere af∣ter Christs birth, 630. Afterwards being other whiles overthrowne and destroyed with the Danish stormes, John Caiu . it lay a long time forlorne and of no account, untill all be∣gan to revive under the Normans governement. And not long after, Innes, Hostels and Halles were built for Scholers, howbeit endowed with no possessions. But Hugh Balsham Bishop of Ely, in the yeere 1284. built the first Colledge called Peter-house, and endowed it with Lands: whose ex∣ample these ensuing did imitate and follow: Richard Badew with the good helpe and furtherance of Lady Elizabeth Clare Countesse of Vlster, in the yeere 1340. founded Clare Hall: Lady Mary S. Paul Countesse of Pembroch in the yeere 1347. Pembroch Hall : The Guild or Society of Corpus Christi Brethren, Corpus Christi Colledge, which is called also S. Bennet Colledge: William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, about the yeere 1353. Trinity Hall: Edmund Gonevil in the yeere 1348. and Iohn Caius Doctor of Physicke in our time, Gonevil and Caius Colledge: Henry the Sixth King of England erected Kings Colledge in the yeere 1441. whereunto he joyned a Chappell, which may rightly be counted one of the fairest buildings of the whole world. His wife Margaret of Anjou, in the yeere 1443. built Queenes Colledge: Robert Woodlarke Professor of Divinity in the yeere 1459. S. Katharines Hall: Iohn Alcocke Bishop of Ely in the yeere 1497. was the founder of Iesus Colledge: Lady Margaret Countesse of Richmond mother to King Henry the Seaventh, about the yeere 1506. erected Christs Colledge, and S. Iohns, enlarged now in goodly manner with new buildings: Sir Thomas Audley Lord Chancellour of England, in the yeere 1542. built Maudlen Colledge ; which Sir Christopher Wray Lord chiefe Justice of England hath lately bew∣tified with new buildings and endowed with great possessions: And that most puis∣sant King, Henry the Eight, in the yeere of our salvation 1546. made Trinity Colledge of three others, to wit, of S. Michaels House or Colledge, which Herveie Stanton in the reigne of Edward the Second built, of Kings Hall founded by King Edward the Third, and of Fishwicks Hostell. Which Colledge, that the Students might inhabite more pleasantly, is now repaired, nay rather new built, with that magnificence, by the carefull direction of Thomas Nevill Doctor of Divinity, Master of the said Col∣ledge, and Deane of Canterbury, that it is become a Colledge for stately greatnesse, for uniforme building and beauty of the roomes, scarce inferiour to any other in Christendome: and he himselfe may bee accounted in the judgement even of the greatest Philosopher Truly Decently magnificent. , for bestowing so great cost in pub∣like and not in his owne private uses. Also wherein I congratulate our Age, and our selves in the behalfe of good learning, that honourable and prudent man Sir Walter Mildmay knight, one of the Privy Counsell to Queene Elizabeth, who founded a new Colledge in the honour of Emanuel : and Lady Francis Sidneie Countesse of Sussex, in her last will gave a Legacy of 5000. pounds to the building of a Colledge that should be called Sidney-Sussex, which is now fully finished. I let passe here litle Monasteries and Religious houses because they were of small note, Barnewell. unlesse it were Barnewell Abbey, which Sir Paine Peverell a worthy and valiant warriour, Standard-bearer to Robert Duke of Normandy in the holy War against Infidels, translated, in the reigne of Henry the first, from S. Giles Church, where Picot the Sheriffe had ordained secular Priests, Historia Barne∣wallensis. unto this place, and brought into it thirty Monkes, Historia Barn∣wellensis. for that himselfe at that time was thirty yeeres of Age. The reason of that name Barnewell, you may read if it please you, out of the private History of that place, in these words: Paganut. Sir Payne Peverell obtained of King Henry the First, a certaine plot of ground without the Burgh of Cambridge: Out of the very midst of that place there sprung up certaine Fountaines very pure and lively, which in English they called Barnewell in those daies, as one would say the wels of Barnes, that is, Children; For that Boyes and Youthes meeting once a yeare there on the Even of Saint Iohn Baptists Nativity, after the English manner ex∣ercised themselves in wrestling and other sports and pastimes befitting their age, yea and mer∣rily applauded one another with songs and minstralsie. Whence it came, that for the number of Boyes and Girles running thither and there playing, grew to be a custome, that on the sud∣daine a multitude of buyers and sellers repaired thither. Neither was Cambridge, (albeit it was consecrated to the Muses ) altogether free from the furies of Mars. For, when the Danes robbed and spoyled up and downe, many times they wintered here: and in the yeere of Redemption 1010. when Sue∣no the Dane, by most cruell and terrible tyranny, bare downe all before him, they spared not the honour of the place, nor the Muses, (which we read that Sylla yet did at Athens ) but pittifully burnt and defaced it all. Neverthelesse at the first comming in of the Normans, it was sufficiently peopled. For, thus we read in the Domesday booke of King William the Conquerour. The Burrough of Grentbridge is divided into tenne Wards, and hath 387. Mansion houses. But eighteene houses were destroyed for buil∣ding of the Castle, what time, as the said King William the First determined to over∣awe the English every where (whom lately hee had conquered) with Castles, as it were with bridles of servitude. Afterwards in the Barons warre, it sustained great losse by the out-lawed Barons out of the Isle of Ely : therefore Henry the Third to represse their outrages caused a deepe ditch to be cast on the East side, which is still called Kings ditch. Here happily there is a secret expectation of some, that I should give mine opi∣nion as touching the antiquity of this University. But I will bee no dealer in this case: For, I meane not to make comparison betweene these two most flourishing Universities of ours, to whom I know none equall. Howbeit I feare me, they have builded Castles in the Ayre, and thrust upon us devices of their owne braines; who extolling the antiquity thereof farre above any probability of truth, have written that this Cantaber of Spaine streight after Rome was built, and many yeeres before the Nativity of Christ erected this University. True and certaine it is, that when∣soever it was first ordained, it was a seat of learning about the time of King Henry the First. For, thus wee read in an old Additament of Peter Blessensis unto Ingulph. Abbot Ioffred sent ouer to his Manour of Cotenham neere Cambridge, Joffred made Abbot of Crowland. Anno 1109. Gislebert his fellow Monke, and professour of Divinity, with three other Monkes: who following him into Eng∣land, being throughly furnished with Philosophicall Theoremes, and other primitive scien∣ces, repaired dayly to Cambridge: and having hired a certaine publike Barne, made open pro∣fession of their sciences, and in short space of time drew together a great number of Schollers. But in the second yeere after their comming, the number of their Scholars grew so great, as well from out of the whole Country as the Towne; that the biggest house and barne that was, or any Church whatsoever sufficed not to receive them all. Studium Au∣relianense. Whereupon sorting themselves apart in severall places, and taking the Vniversity of Orleance for their paterne, earely in the mor∣ning, Monke Odo a singular Grammarian and Satyricall Poet read Grammer unto Boyes and those of the younger sort assigned unto him, according to the Doctrine of Priscian and of Remigius upon him. At one of the clocke, Terricus a most witty and subtile Sophister taught the elder sort of young men, Aristotles Logicke, after the Introductions of Porphyrie and the Comments of Averroes. At three of the clocke Monke William read a Lecture in Tullies Rhetoricke and Quintilians Flores: But the great Master Gislebert, upon every Sunday, and Holy-dayes, preached GODS Word unto the People. And thus out of this little Fountaine, which grew to bee a great River, wee see how the Citty of GOD now is be∣come enriched, and all England made fruitfull, by meanes of very many Masters and Teachers proceeding out of Cambridge, in manner of the Holy Paradise, &c. But at what time it became an Vniversity by authority, Robert de Remington shall tell you. Vnder the Reigne (saith hee) of Edward the First, Grantbridge of a Schoole was made an Vniversity (such as Oxenford is) by the Court of Rome. But what meane I thus unadvisedly to step into these lists? Wherein long since two most learned old men have encountred one with another: Unto whom verely, as to right learned men I am willing to yeeld up my weapons, and vaile bonnet with all reverence. The Me∣ridian line cutting the Zenith just over Cambridge, is distant from the furthest West poynt twenty three degrees, and twenty five scruples. And the Arch of the same Meridian lying betweene the Aequator and Verticall poynt, is fiftie two degrees and II. scruples. Cam from Cambridge continuing his course by Waterbeach an ancient seat of Nuns, * which Lady Mary S. Paul translated from thence to Denny somewhat higher but no∣thing healthfuller, when in a low ground he hath spread a Mere, associateth himselfe with the River Ouse. But to returne hard under Cambridge Eastward neere unto Sture a little brooke is kept every yeere in the moneth of September, Stourbridge Faire. the greatest Faire of all England, whether you respect the multitude of buyers and sellers resorting thither, or the store of commodities there to be vented. Hard by whereas the way was most com∣berous and troublesome to passengers to and fro, that right good and praise-worthy man G. Hervy Doctor of the Civill Law and M. of Trinity Hall in Cambridge, made not long since with great charges but of a Godly and laudable intent a very faire raised Causey, for three miles or thereabout in length toward Neumercat. Neere unto Cambridge on the South-East side, there appeare aloft certaine high Hills; Gogmagog Hills. the Students call them Gogmagog-Hills: Henry of Huntingdon tearmed them Amoenissima montana de Balsham, that is, The most pleasant Mountaines of Balsham, by reason of a little Village standing beneath them, wherein as hee writeth, the Danes left no kinde of most savage cruelty unattempted. On the top of these hills I saw a Fort intrenched, A Military Fort. and the same very large, strengthened with a threefold Rampire: an hold surely in those dayes inexpugnable, as some skilfull men in feats of Warre bee of opinion, were it not that water is so farre off. Gervase of Tilbury seemeth to call it Vandelbiria. Beneath Cambridge (saith he) there was a place named Vandelbiria, for that the Vandals wasting the parts of Brittaine, Wandlesbury. with cruell slaughter of Christians, there en∣camped themselves: where upon the very top of the hill they pitched their Tents; there is a Plaine inclosed round with a Trench and Rampire, which hath entrance into it but in one place as it were at a Gate. Touching the Martiall spectre, or sprite that walked here, which he addeth to the rest, because it is but a meere toyish and fantasticall devise of the doting vulgar sort; I willing over-passe it. For it is not my purpose to tell pleasant tales, and tickle eares. In the Vale under these hills is Salston to be seene, Salston. which from the Burges of Burgh-Green, by Walter De-la-pole and Ingalthorp, came unto Sir Iohn Nevill Marquesse Mont-acute, and by his daughter and one of his heires to the Hudlestons, who have lived here in worship and reputation. More Eastward, first we meete with Hildersham, belonging sometimes to the Bust∣lers and now by marriage to the Parises: Horsheath. Further hard by the Woods, is Horsheath situate; the Possession whereof is knowne by a long descent to have pertained unto the ancient Families of the Argentons and Alingtons, See in Hert∣fordshire. of whom elsewhere I have writ∣ten, and is now the habitation of the Alingtons. Adjoyning hereunto is Castle Camps, Castle Camps the ancient seat also of the Veres Earles of Oxford, which Hugh Vere held (as the old booke of Inquisition Records) That he might be the Kings Chamberleine: whereas notwithstanding most true it is, that Henry the First King of England granted unto Aubry de Vere that Office in these words: Magistra Came∣raria Angliae. Lord Great Chamberleine. The principall Chamberlaineship of all Eng∣land in Fee and Inheritance, with all the Dignities, Liberties, and Honours thereto belong∣ing, as freely and honourably, as Robert Mallet held the same, &c. The Kings notwith∣standing ordained sometimes one, and sometimes another at their pleasure to exe∣cute this Office. The Earles of Oxford also, Inq. 6. E. 2. that I may note it incidently, by the heire of R. Sandford held the Manours of Fingrey and Wulfelmelston by Serjeanty of Chamberlainship to the Queenes at the Coronation of the Kings. Ditches. Not far from hence are seene here and there those great and long Ditches which certainly the East Angles did cast, to restraine the Mercians, who with sudden in∣rodes were wont most outragiously to make havocke of all before them. The first of these beginneth at Hinkeston, runneth Eastward by Hildersham toward Hors-heath, about five miles in length. The second neere unto this, called Brentditch goeth from Melborne by Fulmer. Where D. Hervies cawsey which I mentioned, endeth, there appeareth also a third forefence or ditch cast up in old time: which beginning at the East banke of the river Cam, reacheth directly by Fenn-Ditton, or more truly Ditch-ton (so called of the very Ditch ) betweene great Wilberham and Fulburn, as farre as to Balsham. At this day this is called commonly Seauen mile Dyke, because it is seaven miles from Newmercate: in times past, Fleamdyke. Fleam-Dyke in old English, that is, Flight-Dyke, of some memorable flight there, as it seemeth. At the said Wilberham sometimes called Wilburgham, dwelt in times past the Barons Lisle of De Rubeo monte. Rong-mount, De Insula. men of ancient nobility: of whom John, for his Martiall prowesse was by King Edward the Third ranged among the first founders of the order of the Garter: and of that Family there yet remaineth an heire Male, a reverend old Man and full of Children, named Edmund Lisle, who is still Lord of this place. More East from hence five miles within the Country, is to bee seene the fourth forefence or ditch, the greatest of all the rest, with a rampier thereto; which the com∣mon people wondring greatly at, as a worke made by Devils and not by men, use to call Devils-Dyke: Divels Dyke. others, Rech-Dyke, of Rech a little mercate towne, where it begin∣neth. This is doubtlesse that, whereof Abbo Floriacensis when he describeth the sight of East England, writeth thus. From that part whereas the Sun inclineth Westward, the Province it selfe adjoyneth to the rest of the Island, and is therefore passable: but for feare of be∣ing overrun with many invasions and inrodes of enemies, it is fortified in the front with a banke or rampier like unto an huge wall, and with a Trench or Ditch below in the ground. This for many miles together cutteth overthwart that Plaine which is called Newmarket∣heath, where it lay open to incursions, beginning at Rech: above which the Country is fenny, and therefore impassable: and it endeth nere to Cowlidge, where the passage by reason of woods was more cumbersome. And it was the limit as well of the Kingdome, as of the Bishopricke of the East Angles. Who was the author of so great a peece of worke, it is uncertaine. Some later writers say it was King Canutus the Dane: Abbo died anno. 1003. Canutus began his reigne Anno. 1018. Anno. 905. whereas notwithstanding the said Abbo made mention of it, who died be∣fore that Canutus obtained the Kingdome of England: and the Saxon Chronicle, where it relateth the rebellion of Athelwolph against King Edward the Elder, calleth it simply Dyke ; and sheweth, That King Edward laid waste whatsoever lieth betweene the Dyke and the river Ouse, as farre as to the North Fennes: also that Aethelwold the rebell, and Eohric the Dane, were at that time slaine there in battell. But they who wrote since Canutus times, termed it, Saint Edmunds limit, and Saint Edmunds Dyke ; and verily thinke, that King Canutus cast it up, who being most devoted to Saint Edmund the Martyr granted unto the religious Monkes of Saint Edmunds Bury (for to make satis∣faction for the wicked cruelty of Swan his father wrought upon them) very great immunities, even as farre as to this Dyke: whence it is, that William of Malmesbury in his booke Of Bishops writeth thus, The Customers and Toll gatherers, which in other places make foule worke and outrage, without respect or difference of right and wrong, there in humble manner on this side Saint Edmunds Dike, surcease their quarrels and braules. And certaine it is that these two fore-fences last named were called Saint Edmunds Dykes. For Ma∣thew Florilegus hath recorded that the said battell against Aethelwolph, was fought betweene the two Dykes of Saint Edmund. Burwell. Nere unto Rech, standeth Burwel, a Castle in later times of the Lord Tiptoft, which in those most troublesome times of King Stephen Geffrey Mandevill Earle of Essex, who by violent invasion of other mens possessions lost much honour, valiantly assaul∣ted: untill that being shot through the head with an arrow, he delivered those coun∣tries from the feare they had stood in a long time. Scarce two miles off, Lanheath. stands Lanheath, where for these many yeeres the Cottons, right worshipfull Gentlemen of Knights degree have dwelt: Wicken. From which Wicken is not farre distant, * which came to the Family of the Peytons by a daughter and coheire of the Gernons about Edward the Thirds time, Isleham. Peyton. as afterward Isleham descended to them by a coheire of Bernard in Henry the Sixth's time, which Knightly Family of Peytons flowred out of the same Male-stocke, whence the Vffords Earles of Suffolke descended, as appeareth by their Coate-armour, albeit they assumed the surname of Peyton according to the use of that age, from their Manour of Peyton-hall in Boxford in the County of Suffolke. Upon the same Dyke also, Kirtling. Barons North. is seated Kirtling, called likewise Catlidge, famous in these dayes by reason of the principall house of the Barons North ; since Queene Ma∣ry honoured Sir Edward North, with that title for his wisedome: but in times past it was famous for a Synode held there, 977. what time as the Clergy men were at hot strife among themselves about the celebration of the feast of Easter. The higher and Northerly part of this Shire is wholly divided into river Isles: The Fennes and Isle of Ely. and being distinguished by many Ditches, Chanels and Draines, with a pleasant greene hew all Summer time contenteth the eyes of the beholders: but in Winter wholly in manner over-covered with water, farther every way than a man is able to ken, re∣sembleth in some sort a very Sea. They that inhabited this fennish Country and all the rest beside, (which from the edge and borders of Suffolke, as farre as to Wainflet in Lincolne-shire conteineth threescore and eight miles, and millions of acres lying in these foure Shires, Cam∣bridge, Huntingdon, North-hampton and Lincolne) were in the Saxons time called Girvii, Girvi . that is, as some interpret it, Fen-men or Fen-dwellers. A kind of people according to the nature of the place where they dwell rude, uncivill, and envious to all others whom they call Vpland-men: who stalking on high upon stilts, apply their mindes, to grasing, fishing and fowling. The whole Region it selfe, which in winter season and sometimes most part of the yeere is overflowed by the spreading waters of the rivers Ouse, Grant, Nen, Welland, Glene, and Witham, having not loades and sewers large enough to voide away: But againe when their Streames are retired within their owne Channels, it is so plenteous and ranke of a certaine fatte grosse and full hey, (which they call Lid ) that when they have mowen downe as much with the better as will serve their turnes, they set fire on the rest and burne it in November, that it may come up againe in great abundance. At which time a man may see this Fen∣nish and moyst Tract on a light flaming fire all over every way, and wonder thereat. Great plenty it hath besides of Turfe and Sedge for the maintenance of fire: of reed also for to thatch their Houses, yea and of Alders, beside other watery Shrubbes. But chiefly it bringeth forth exceeding store of willowes both naturally, and also for that being planted by mans hand they have serv'd in good steed, and often cut downe with their manifold increase, and infinit number of heires (to use Plinies word) against the violent force of the waters rushing against the bankes. Whereof also as well here, as in other places there be baskets made, which seeing the Britains call Bascades, I for my part, that I may note so much by the way, do not understand the Poet Martiall in that Distichon, unlesse hee meaneth these, among the Presents and Gifts sent to and fro. Barbara de pictis veni Bascauda Britannis, Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam. By barbarous name, a Baskaud I from painted Britans came, But now Rome faine would call me hers, although I be the same. Besides al this the herb, Scordium. Scordiū, which also is called Water Germāder, groweth plenti∣fully here hard by the ditches sides: but as for these Fenny Ilands, Foelix a writer of good antiquity hath depainted them forth in these words. There is a Fen of exceeding great largenesse which beginning at the bankes of the river Gront, arising somewhere with sedge plots, in other places with blacke waters yeelding a duskish vapour, with woods also among the Isles, and having many winding turnes of the banke, reacheth out in a very long tract, from South to North-East as farre as to the Sea. And the very same Fenne William a Monke of Crowland in the life of Guthlake hath thus described in verse. Est apud Angligenas à Grontae flumine, longo Orbe per anfractus stagnosos, & fluviales, Circumfusapalus, Orientalisque propinqua Littoribus Pelagi, sese distendit ab Austro In longum versus Aquilonem, gurgite tetro, Morbosos pisces vegetans, & arundine densa Ventorum strepitus, quasi quaedam verba susurrans. A spatious Fenne in England lies from Gront that rivers side, Among the winding crankes of Lakes and Rivers far and wide, Y' spred, and neere unto the bankes of Easterne Sea doth stretch, It selfe; and so from Southerne side along North Eastward reach. In muddy gulfe unwholsome fish it breeds: as reeds doe shake There growing thicke, of winds as words a whispering noise they make. Joyne hereunto if you please thus much out of Henry of Huntingdon: This Fenny country (saith he) is passing rich and plenteous, yea and beautifull to behold, watered with many Rivers running downe to it, garnished with a number of Meres both great and small, trimly adorned likewise with many Woods and Ilands. And for a small conclusion of this matter, take with you also these few words of William of Malmesbury speaking of his time. So great store there is here of Fishes that strangers comming hither make a wonder at it, and the Inhabitants laugh thereat, to see them wonder. Neither is Water-Foule lesse cheape; so that for one halfe penny and under, five men at the least may not onely eat to slake hunger and content nature, but also feed their fill of Fish and Foule. As touching the drying up of this Fenny country, what discourse and arguing oftentimes there hath beene either by way of sound and wholsome counsell, or of a goodly pretence and shew of a common good, even in the High Court of Parlia∣ment, I list not to relate. Pausanias in Corinth. But it is to be feared least (that which often hath happened to the Pontine Marishes of Italy ) it would come againe to the former state. So that many thinke it the wisest and best course according to the sage admonition in like case of Apollo his Oracle, Not to intermeddle at all with that which God hath ordained. Upon the naturall strength of this place and plenty of all things there, seditious Re∣bels have often presumed; and not onely the English when they banded themselves against William Conquerour, but the Barons also whensoever they were Out-lawed, from hence troubled and molested their Kings. But evermore they had ill successe, albeit otherwhiles they built fortresses both at Eryth and also at Athered, at this day Audre, Audre. where the easiest entrance is into this Isle. And even yet neere unto Andre, is to be seene a Military rampire of a meane height, but of a very large compasse, which they call Belsars-hils, of one Belisar, I wot not who. Part of this Fenny country that lyeth more South and is the greatest by farre, which also is counted of this shire, was named in the English Saxon tongue now The Isle of Ely, Ely. Saint Ethel∣dreda com∣mon y, S. Audrye. of the chiefe Iland, which name Bede hath derived from E les, and thereupon sometime tearmed it Insulam anguillariam, that is, The Isle of E les. Polydore Virgil fetcheth the originall therof from the Greek word , that signifieth Marish, others from Helig a Brittish word betokening Willowes or Sallowes, wherewith it doth most of all abound. Part of this Region, we read that one Tombert a Prince of the Southern Girvii gave as a dowry to his wife Audry, who after she had left her second husband Egfrid, King of the Nordan humberland, being fully resolved to serve Christ, built a Monastery for Nunnes Votaries in the principall Iland of these, properly called which was then reckoned at 600 Hides or Families ; and of this Monastery, she also her selfe the first Abbesse. Yet was not this the first Church in the fenny country. For the booke of Ely recordeth, that S. Austen of Canterbury founded a Church at Cradi∣den ; which Penda the Mercian afterwards rased: and William of Malmesbury reporteth, that Foelix Bishop of the East English had his first See at Soham, which yet is within the Diocesse of Norwich. Soham, saith he, is a village situate neere unto a Fen, which was in times past dangerous for those that would passe into Ely by water: now by reason of a way or causey made through the Fenny ground overgrowne with Reeds, men may goe over thither by land. There be remaining still the tokens of a Church destroyed by the Danes, which with the ruines thereof overwhelmed the inhabitants, who were burnt together with it. At which time also that Monastry of S. Audry was overthrowne by the furious Danes: but Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester reedified it: For he, by a composition betweene the King and him, bought the whole Iland a new, and having cast out the Priests thence, stored it with Monks, unto whom King Edgar, as we read in his letters patents, granted with∣in the Fens, jurisdiction over the secular causes of two Hundreds, and without the Fens, of two Hundreds and an halfe in Wichlaw, within the province of the East-Angles, which are called at this day, The liberties of S. Audry. Afterwards Kings and great Noble men enriched it with large revenewes: and Earle Brithnoth especially, Being now ready to joyne battaile with the Danes in the yeare 999. gave unto the Church of Ely, Somersham, Spaldwic, Trum∣pinton, Ratindum, Heisbury, Fulburn, Tinerston, Triplestow, and Impetum, (for that the Monkes had in magnificent manner entertained him) in case he should loose his life in that battaile. But his fortune was to die at Maldun, after hee had fought with the Danes 14. dayes together. And so rich was the Monastery, that the Abbot thereof, as witnesseth Malmsbury, laid up every yeere in his owne purse a thousand and foure hundred pounds. And Richard the last Abbot sonne, to Earle Gislebert, being over-tipled, as it were with wealth, disdaining to bee under the Bishop of Lincolne, dealt with the King, what by golden words, as the Monkes write, and what by great suite and po∣liticke meanes, that a Bishops See might be erected here: which, hee prevented by death obtained not. Yet soone after, King Henry the first having gotten allowance from the Pope, made Herveie, who had beene Bishop of Bangor and by the Welshmen cast out of his owne seat, the first Bishop of Ely: unto whom and to his successors he laied for his Diocesse Cambridge-shire, which had belonged before unto the Bishop of Lincolne, Saint Audrie Libertie. and confirmed certaine Royalties in these Ilands. To the Bishops of Lin∣colne, from whose jurisdiction he had taken away this Iland and Cambridge-shire, he granted for to make amends, Ely booke. The Manour of Spaldwic : or as the booke of Ely hath, The Manour of Spaldwic was given unto the Church of Lincolne for ever, in exchange for the Bishops superintendency over the County of Cambridge. Herveie being now made Bishop, sought by all meanes possible to augment the dignity of his Church. He obtained that it might bee every where Toll-free (these are the very words of the booke of Ely: ) He set it free from the yoke of service of watch and ward, that it owed to the Castle of Norwich: hee made a way from Exning to Ely, through the Fennes, sixe miles in length; he beganne the faire Palace at Ely for his Successours, and pur∣chased to it faire Lands and not a few Lordships. And his Successours by abridging the number of Monkes (for, from threescore and tenne they brought them downe to forty) flowed with riches and wealth in great abundance even unto our time; and their festivall and solemne Holydayes they celebrated with so sumptuous provision and stately pompe, that they wonne the prayse and prize from all the Abbaies in England: whereupon a Poet also in that age wrote these verses not unproperly. Pravisis aliis, Eliensia festa videre, Est, quasi praevisa nocte, videre diem. See, after others, Ely feasts, and surely thou wilt say, That having seene the night before, thou seest now the day. The Church likewise, which now began for age and long continuance to decay, they built up by litle and litle, and brought it to that ample statelinesse which now it hath: For, large it is, high and faire, but somewhat defaced, by reason of Noblemens and Bishops tombes (not without most shamefull indignity) are broken downe. And now in stead of that great Covent of Monks, there are established a Deane, Prebenda∣ries, a Grammar schoole, wherein 24. children are maintained and taught. Foure spe∣ciall things there are about this Church, that the Common people talke much of: The Lanterne on the very toppe thereof, The Lanterne. just over the Quire, supported with eight pillars, and raised upon them right artificially, by Iohn Hothum the Bishop. Vnder the Church towards the North, standeth Saint Maries Chappell a singular fine peece of worke, built by Simon Montacute, Bishop. On the South side, there is an huge heape of earth cast up round of a great heigth, which they call the Mount, having had a wind mill upon it. And lastly, a Vine bearing fruit in great plenty, which now is wi∣thered and gone. These 4. a Monk of this place in times past knit up within this Rhyme. Haec sunt Eliae, Lanterna, Capella Mariae, Atque molendinum, Nec non dans vinea vinum. These things you may at Ely see, The Lanterne, Chapell of Saint Marie, A Winde-mill mounted up on hie, A Vine-yard yeelding Wine, yeerely. As for Ely it selfe, it is a small Cittie, nor greatly to bee counted of, either for beauty, or frequency and resort, as having an unwholsome Aire by reason of the Fens round about, although it be seated somewhat higher. Neere to it is Downham where the Bishop hath his retyring House with a Parke: neere to Downham is Cow∣ney the ancientest seat of the Family surnamed for their habitation heere, L'isle and De Insula, and first planted here by Nigellus the second Bishop of Ely their Allies in the time of King Henry the First, as is set downe in a Lieger Booke of Ely. Chate∣ries or Cheaterich is not farre hence Westward, were Alwena a devout woman foun∣ded a Nunnery upon a coppid ground encompassed with Fens, while her husband founded Ramsey. But higher Northward amidst the Fennes, there stood another Abbay of very great name, Thorney. called Thorney, of thornes and bushes that grow thicke about it, but in times past Ankerige of Ankers or Eremites living there solitarily; where as we finde in Peterborough booke Sexvulph a devout and religious man built a Monastery with little Cels for Eremits: Which being afterwards by the Danes throwne downe, Aetbelwold Bishop of Winchester (that he might promote the Mo∣nasticall profession) reedified, stored it with Monkes, and compassed it round about with trees. The place, as writeth William of Malmesbury, Representeth a very Paradise; for that in pleasure and delight it resembleth Heaven it selfe: in the very Marishes bearing Trees, that for their streight talnesse, and the same without knots, strive to touch the Stars; a Plaine is there as even as the Sea, which with greene grasse allureth the eye, so smooth and level that if any walke along the fields they shall finde nothing to stumble at. There is not the least parcell of ground that lies waste and void there. Here shall you finde the earth rising somewhere for Apple trees, there shall you have a field set with Vines, which either creepe upon the ground, or mount on high upon poles to support them. A mutuall strife there is betweene nature and hus∣bandry, that what the one forgetteth, the other might supply and produce. What will be said of the faire and beautifull buildings, which it is a wonder to see how the ground amid those Fens and Marishes, so firme and sound, doth beare with sure and stedfast foundations? A wonder∣full solitary place is there afforded to Monkes for quiet life, that so much the more constantly settle their mindes upon Heavenly things for that they see men very seldome, and so are they seene in their state more mortified and lower brought. A wonder it is to have a Woman seene there: if come men thither; there is rejoycing as at so many Angels. In a word, I may truly say, that this Island is an Hostell of Chastity, an harbour of Honesty, and a Schoole or Col∣ledge of Divine Philosophie. Touching Wisbich, Wisbich. the Bishop of Elies Castle, about 13. miles off, situate among the fennes and rivers, and made of late a prison to keepe the Papists in hold, I have nothing else to say, Walepoole. but that this towne together with Walepole, was in old time given by the owner thereof unto the monastery of Ely, what time as he consecrated Alwin his little son there to live a monkes life: that King William the First built a Castle there, when the outlawed Lords made rodes out of this fenny country: and that in the yeere of our salvation 1236. when the Ocean being disquieted with violent windes, for two dayes continually together had beaten upon the shore, made an exceeding wide breach and overwhelmed both land and people. But the Castle of bricke that now is seene there, Iohn Morton Bishop of Ely built within the remembe∣rance of our great grandfathers: who also drew as streight as a line in this fenny coun∣try a ditch, Newleame. which they call the Newleame for better conveyance and carriage by wa∣ter, that by this meanes the towne being well frequented might gaine the more and grow to wealth. Which fell out quite contrary: For it standeth now in no great steed, and the neighbour inhabitants complaine that the course of Nen into the Sea by Clowcrosse, Clowcrosse. is by this meanes altogether hindred and stopped. The first Earle of Cambridge that I can finde, Earle of Cam∣bridge. was William the brother of Ranulph Earle of Chester, as wee read in a patent or instrument of Alexander Bishop of Lin∣colne, bearing date in the yeere 1139. Afterwards, those of the royall blood in Scot∣land that were Earles of Huntingdon, wee may thinke to have beene Earles of Cam∣bridge also: For that it appeareth certainly out of the Records of the realme, that Da∣vid Earle of Huntingdon, received the third penny of the County or Earledome of Cambridge. Long time after, King Edward the Third advanced Sir Iohn of Henault brother to William the third Earle of Holland and of Henault to this honour, for the love of Queene Philip his wife, who was cosin to the said Iohn. For whose sake also when Iohn was revolted from him and tooke part with the French, hee honoured with the same title William Marquesse of Iuliers, the said Queene Philips sisters son. After the death of these two Forainers, King Edward the Third translated this dig∣nity to his fifth sonne Edmund of Langley, which after he had held foure yeeres (my warrant I have out of an old manuscript, being in the hands of that skilfull Antiqua∣ry Francis Thinn ) the Earle of Henault cosin to Queene Philip, came into Parliament house, put in a claime for his right, and returned backe well contented. The said Edmund of Langly afterwards Duke of Yorke had two sonnes, Edward Duke of Yorke, who for a cer∣taine time held the Earldome of Cambridge, and was slaine in the battell of Agin-court: and Richard by the grace and favour of King Henry the Fifth, and consent of his brother Edward, was created Earle of Cambridge. But when he (ungratefull and ambitious man that hee was) contrived the destruction of that good and noble Prince, and so lost his head; the title of Cambridge died the same day that he did, or lurked at least wise among other titles of his sonne Richard, who was afterwards Duke of Yorke and restored to his blood and estate, as being cosin and heire to his Unkle Edward Duke of Yorke. This Shire containeth Parishes 163. HVNTINGDON Comitatus qui pars fuir ICENORVM HUNTINGDON-SHIRE. N Ext unto Cambridge-shire, lyeth HUNTINGDON-SHIRE, in the Saxon tongue ; so situate, that South∣ward it confineth upon Bedford-shire; Westward upon North∣amptonshire: like as Northwards, where by the River Or Aufon. 1. Nen. Avon it is parted; and Eastward upon Cambridge-shire, a Country good for corne and tillage: and toward the East, where it is fen∣ny, very rich and plentifull for the feeding of Cattaile: else∣where right pleasant, by reason of rising hils and shady groves: For, the Inhabitants report, that in ancient times, it was throughout beset with woods: and certaine it is, that it was a Forest, untill that king Henry the Second, in the beginning of his raign disforested it, (as we find in an old perambulation) all save Way∣bridge Sapple and Herthei, which were Woods of the Lords demaine, and remaine still forests. The South part thereof; the River Ouse (that I have so often spoken of) runneth by, and bedecketh with flowers. On which River among other of lesse note, there stand some Townes of good note. First, after it hath left Bedford-shire, and is entred into this County, Saint Needs. it visiteth Saint Neots, commonly called Saint Needs, so named of one Neotus, a man both learned and holy; who travailed all his life time in propa∣gating of Christian Religion, whose body was translated from Neotstok in Cornwall hither, and in honour of him, Alfrick converted the Palace of Earle Elfride unto a Monastery. The which Dame Roisia Wife to Richard Lord of Clare, shortly after the comming in of the Normas enriched with many faire Possessions; But before it was named Ainulphsbury of one Ainulph likewise an holy and devout man, Ainsbury. which name continueth still also in one part of it. A little beneath this, at Aileweston a very small Village, there are two little Springs, the one fresh, the other somewhat brackish: of which the neighbours give out, Holsome and medicinable wel . that this is good against scabs and leprosie, the other against the dimnesse of the eye-sight. From thence not farre, Ouse passeth to Bugden a proper faire house of the Bishops of Lincolne, and so by Hinchingbrok, a religious house sometimes of Nuns whom King William the Conquerour translated hither from Eltesley in Cambridge-shire, and now the dwelling house of the Cromwels, knights; commeth to Huntingdon, Huntingdon. in the English-Saxon tongue, as Marianus reporteth , in the publique seale Huntersdune, that is, the hill or downe of hunters, as Henry Archdeacon of this place, who flourished 400. yeares since, interpreteth it: whence it used in their seale, an hunter ; and Leland our Countriman alluding thereunto, hath coined a new Latine word for it, namely Venantodunum. This is the chiefe Towne of all this Shire, (to which it hath given also the name) farre excelling all the Townes about it, the same Archdeacon saith, as well for lightsome and pleasant situation, as for the beauty and faire shew that it hath it selfe: as well also for the vicinity of the Fennes as for great store of Deere and Fish. In King Edward the Confessors time, (that I may note so much out of Domesday booke ) There were in this Borrough foure Ferlings, that is, Quarters or Wards: In two of them were 116. Burgesses, paying custome and gelt, and under them 100. Bordarij ; in the other two 111. Burgesses for all customes and the Kings gelt. It is seated upon the North-banke of Ouse, somewhat high, stretching out in length Northward, adorned with foure Churches: and it had a little Abbay foun∣ded by Maude the Empresse and Eustace Lovetoft: the ruines whereof Eastward I have seene hard under the Towne. By the River neere unto the Bridge which is faire built of stone, the Mount and Plot of a Castle, is to bee seene, which in the yeare of our Redemption 917. King Edward the Elder built anew: and David the Scotishman, unto whom, as an ancient Historiographer writeth King Stephen had given the Burrough of Huntingdon for an augmentation of his estate, enlarged with many new buildings and Bulwarkes: but in the end King Henry the Second both because it was a place of refuge for seditious Rebels, and for that the Scots and the Saint Lizes had oftentimes raised quarrels and contention about it, to cut off all oc∣casions of strife, laid it even with the ground; when as hee, provoked with their unreasonable variance swore an oath, that neither they of Saint Lizes nor the Scot∣tishmen should quarrell any more for it. From these Castle hils, where there is a good∣ly prospect a great way off, a man may behold below a medow which they call Port∣sholme, environed round about with the River Ouse, the same very exceeding large, and of all others that the Sunne ever shone upon, most fresh and beautifull: whereof in the Spring time this may be truly said: Ver pingit vario gemmantia prata colore: The pleasant Spring faire flowers doe yeeld, Of divers colours, in this field. With such a delectable variety of gaye colours it pleaseth and contenteth the eye. On the hither banke over against Huntingdon, standeth the mother as it were thereof, from whence it had his Originall, called in Domesday booke Godmundcester, and at this day Good-man-chester, Godman-chester. for Gormonchester: A very great country Towne, and of as great name for tillage; situate in an open ground, of a light mould, and bending to the Sun. Neither is there a Towne againe in all England that hath more stout and lusty hus∣bandmen, or more ploughs agoing: For, they make their boast that they have in for∣mer time received the Kings of England as they passed in their progresse this way, with nine score ploughs, brought forth in a rusticall kind of pompe for a gallant shew. Verily, of our Nation, ther be none that apply their mindes so seriously as they doe to husbandry (which Columella termeth the neere cozin of Wisedome ) whether you respect their skill therein, or their ability to beare the expences, and their willing mind withall to take the paines. Henry of Huntingdon before named, calleth it a Village, in his daies, not unlovely: and truly writeth, that in times past it had been a noble City. For, to say nothing of Roman peeces of coine oftentimes there ploughed up, nor of the di∣stance in the old Itinerary, the very signification of the name may probably prove, that this was the very same City, Durosiponte. which Antonine the Emperor termed DUROLI∣PONTE, amisse, in stead of DUROSIPONTE. For Durosi-ponte (pardon me I pray you for changing one letter) soundeth in the British tongue, A bridge over the water Ose. And that this River is named indifferently and without distinction, Vse, Ise, Ose, and Ouse, all men confesse. But when this name was under the Danes quite abolished, it began to be called Gormoncester, of Gormon the Dane, unto whom after agreement of peace King Aelfred granted these Provinces. Hereto, this old Verse giveth testimony. Gormonis à castri nomine, nomen habet. Gormonchester, at this howre, Takes the name of Gormons Towre. This is that Gormon of whom John Picus an old Author, writeth in this wise: King Aelfred conquered and subdued the Danes, so that they gave what hostages hee would for assu∣rance, either to be packing out of the Land, or else to become Christians. Which thing also was effected. For, their King Guthrum, whom they call Gormond, with thirty of his Nobles and well neere all his people was baptized; and adopted by Aelfred as his Sonne, and by him named Athelstan. Whereupon he remained heere; and the Provinces of the East-English and of the Northumbrians were given to him: that continuing in his allegiance, under the Kings protecti∣on, he might cherish and also maintain them as his inheritance, which he had formerly overrun with spoile and robbery. Neither would this be omitted, that some also of those anci∣ent Writers have termed this place Gumicester, and Gumicastrum, avoucheth withall, that Machutus a Bishop had heere his Episcopall See. And by the name of Gumi∣cester King Henry the Third granted it to his sonne Edmund Earle of Lancaster. Ouse making haste speedily from hence, when he was about to enter into Cambridge∣shire, passeth through most delightsome medowes hard by a proper and faire towne, which sometime in the English-Saxon tongue was called Slepe, Saint Ives. and now S. Ives, of Ivo a Persian Bishop, who, as they write, about the yeare of Christ 600. travailed through England, preached diligently the Word of God, and to this Towne, wherein he left this life, left also his name. From whence notwithstanding shortly after the religious persons translated his body to Ramsey Abbay. Turning aside from hence scarce three miles, Somersham. wee saw Somersham a faire dwelling house, of late dayes belonging to the Bishops of Ely, which Earle Brithnot in the yeare 991. gave to Ely Church, and James Stanley, the lavish, and expencefull Bi∣shop, enlarged with new buildings. A little above that most wealthy Abbay Ramsey was situate amiddest the Fennes, where the Rivers become standing waters, when they have once found a soft kinde of Soile. The description of this place have here if it please you, out of the private History of this Abbay. Ramsey. Ramsey, that is, The Rams Isle, on the West side (for on other sides fennish grounds through which one cannot passe, stretch out farre and wide) is severed from the firme ground almost two bow-shots off by certaine uneven and quaggy miry plots. Which place being won in times past to receive gently within the bosome and brinkes thereof, Vessels arriving there with milde gales of winde in a shallow River onely: now through great labour and cost after the foule and dirty quagmires aforesaid were stopped up with heapes of wood, gravell and stones together, men may passe into on foote on the same side upon a dry causey: and it lieth out in length almost two miles, but spreadeth not all out so much in bredth: which notwith∣standing is beset round about with beautifull rowes of Alder-trees, and reed plots, that with fresh greene canes and streight bulrushes among, make a faire and pleasant shew; and before it was inhabited, garnished and bedecked all over with many sorts of trees, but of wilde Ash s especially, in great aboundance. But now after longer tract of time, part of these groves and woods being cut downe, it is become arable ground of a very fat and plentifull mould, for fruit rich, pleasant for corne, planted with gardens, wealthy in pastures, and in the Spring time, the medowes arraied with pleasant flowers smile upon the beholders: and the whole Island seemeth embroidered, as it were, with variety of gay colours. Besides that, it is compassed all about with Meres full of Eeles, and pooles replenished with fish of many sorts, and with fowle there bred and nourished. Ramsey Mere. Of which Meres, one is called after the name of the Island Ramsey Mere, farre excelling all the other waters adjoyning, in beauty and fertility, on that side where the Isle is counted bigger and the wood thicker, flowing daintily by the sandy banke there∣of, yeeldeth a very delectable sight to behold: in the very gulfes whereof by casting as well of great wide mashed nets, as of other sorts, by laying also of hookes baited, and other instruments devised by fishers craft, are caught oftentimes and drawne certaine Pikes of an huge and won∣derfull bignesse, Hakeds. which the Inhabitants call Hakeds: and albeit the fowlers doe continually haunt the place and catch great store of young water-fowle, yet there is abundance alwaies that remaineth untaken. Furthermore that History sheweth at large, how Ailwin a man of the bloud royall, and for the speciall great authority and favour that hee had with the King, sirnamed Healf-Koning, that is, Halfe King, being admonished and mooved thereunto by a Fishers dreame built it; how Oswald the Bishop furthered and enlar∣ged it; how Kings and others endowed it with so faire revenewes, that for the maintenance of threescore Monkes it might dispend by the yeare seven thousand pounds of our English money. But seeing it is now pulled downe and destroyed, some may thinke I have already spoken overmuch thereof. Yet hereto I will annexe out of the same Authour the Epitaph of Ailwins Tombe, for that it exhibi∣teth unto us an unusuall and strange title of a Dignity. HIC REQUIESCIT AILWINUS INCLI∣TI REGIS EADGARI COGNATUS, TO∣TIUS ANGLIAE ALDERMANNUS, ET HUJUS SACRI COENOBII MIRACU∣LOSUS FUNDATOR. HERE RESTETH AILWIN COZIN TO THE NOBLE KING EADGAR, ALDER∣MAN OF ALL ENGLAND, AND OF THIS HOLY ABBAY THE MIRACULOUS FOUNDER. From hence to Peterborough, which is about ten miles off, King Canutus, because travailing that way and finding it very combersome by reason of swelling Brookes and sloughs, with great cost and labour made a paved Causey, which our Historians call Kings-delfe, Kingsdelfe. not farre from that great Lake Wittlesmere. And as this Abbay did adorne the East side of the Shire, Sawtry, com∣monly. Cunnington. Saltria. Turkill the Dane. so, the middle thereof was beautified by Sal rie, which the second Simon de Sancto Lizio Earle of Huntingdon built. From which not farre, is Cunnington, holden anciently of the Honour of Huntingdon: where, within a foure square Trench, are to be seene expresse remaines of an ancient Castle, which as also Saltrie, was by the gift of Canutus, the seat of Turkill that Dane, who abode heere among the East English, and sent for Sueno King of Denmarke to make spoile of England. After whose departure, Waldeof the sonne of Siward Earle of Northum∣berland enjoyed it, who married Judith Niece to William the Conquerour by his si∣ster on the mothers side: by whose eldest daughter it came to the royall family of Scotland. For she, by a second marriage, matched with David Earle of Huntingdon (who afterwards obtained the Kingdome of Scotland) being the younger sonne of Malcolm Can-mor, King of Scots, and of Margaret his wife descended of the royall line of the English-Saxons: For, shee was Niece to King Edmund Iron-side by his sonne Edward sirnamed, Edwardus Exul. The Banished. David had a sonne named Henry, and Henry had another named David Earle of Huntingdon, by one of whose daughters, Isabel, Cunnington and other lands by right of marriage descended to Sir Robert Bruse: Bruse or Bruis. from whose eldest sonne Robert sirnamed the Noble, James King of Great Britaine line∣ally deriveth his Descent: and from Bernard his younger sonne, unto whom this Cunnington with Exton fell, Sir Robert Cotton Knight is lineally descended; who over and beside other vertues, being a singular lover and searcher of Antiquities, having gathered with great charges from all places the Monuments of venerable Antiquity, hath heere begunne a famous Cabinet, whence of his singular courtesie, hee hath oftentimes given me great light in these darksome obscurities. Mosses. But these Quarters, considering the ground lying so low, and for many moneths in the yeare surrounded and drowned, in some places also floting (as it were) and ho∣ven up with the waters, are not free from the offensive noisomnesse of Meres and the unwholesome aire of the Fennes. Here for sixe miles in length and three in breadth that cleare deepe and fishfull Mere named Wittles-mere spreadeth it selfe, Wittlesmere Lake. which as other Meres in this Tract, doth sometimes in Calmes and faire weather sodainly rise tempestuously, as it were, into violent water-quakes to the danger of the poore fi∣shermen, by reason, as some thinke, of evaporations breaking violently out of the bowels of the earth. As for the unhealthinesse of the place, whereunto onely stran∣gers, and not the natives there are subject, who live long and healthfully, there is a∣mends made, as they account it, by the commodity of fishing, the plentifull feeding, and the abundance of turfe gotten for fewell. For, King Cnut gave commandement by Turkill the Dane, of whom ere while I spake, That to every Village standing about the Fennes, there should bee set out a severall Marsh: who so divided the ground, that each Village by it selfe should have in proper use and occupation so much of the very maine Marsh, as the firme ground of every such Village touched the Marsh lying just against it. And be ordained that no Village might either digge or mow in the Marsh of another without licence, but that the pasture therein should lye all in common, that is, Horne under horne, for the pre∣servation of peace and concord among them. But thus much of this matter. When the sonnes and servants of the said King Cnut, The little Hi∣story of Ely. sent for from Peterborough to Ramsey, were in passing over that Lake, There fell upon them, as they were cheerefull under saile and lifting up their voices with joyfull shoutings, The foundati∣on of Saltry. most untoward and unhappy windes, wherewith a turbulent and tempestuous storme arose, that enclosed them on every side, so that laying aside all hope, they were in utter despaire of their life, security, or any helpe at all. But such was the mercifull clemency of Almighty God, that it forsooke them not wholy, nor suffered the most cruell Gulfe of the waters to swallow them up all quite, but by his providence some of them he delivered mercifully out of those furious and raging waves: but others againe according to his just and secret judgement he permitted amiddest those billowes to passe out of this fraile and mortall life. And when the fame of so fearefull a danger was noised abroad and come to the Kings eares, there fell a mighty trembling and quaking upon him: but being com∣forted and releeved by the counsaile of his Nobles and freinds, for to prevent in time to come all future mishaps by occasion of that outragious monster, hee ordained that his souldiers and servants with their swords and skeins should set out and marke a certaine Ditch in the Mari∣shes lying thereby, betweene Ramsey and Whittlesey, and afterwards that workemen and la∣bourers should skoure and clense them: whereupon, as I have learned of ancient predecessours of good credite, the said Ditch by some of the neighbour Inhabitants tooke the name Swerdes∣delfe, Swerdesdelfe differing from Kings Delfe. upon that marking out by swords: and some would have it to bee termed Cnouts-delfe according to the name of the same King. Yet commonly at this day they call it Steeds dike: and it is counted the limit and bound between this County and Cambridge-shire. In the East side of this Shire, Kimbolton. Kinnibantum Castle, now called Kimbolton, the ha∣bitation in times past of the Mandevilles, afterwards of the Bo uns and Staffords, and at this day of the Wingfields, doth make a faire shew. Under which was Stoneley a prety Abbay founded by the Bigrames. A little from hence is Awkenbury, which King John gave to David Earle of Huntingdon: and John sirnamed the Scot, his sonne, Stephen Se∣grave. Mat. Paris. unto Sir Stephen Segrave: of whom I am the more willing to make mention, for that he was one of those Courtiers who hath taught us, That there is no power al∣waies powerfull. Hardly and with much adoe hee climbed to an eminent and high estate, with great thought and care hee kept it, and as sodainely hee was dejected from it: For, in his youth, of a Clerke he became a Knight, and albeit hee was but of meane parentage, yet through his industry toward his later dayes so enriched and advanced, that being ranged with the great Peeres of the Realme, hee was reputed chiefe Justice of England, and managed at his pleasure after a sort all the affaires of State. But in the end he lost the Kings favour quite, and to his dying day lay close in a Cloyster: and who before time from a Clerkship betooke himselfe through arrogancy to secular service, returning againe to the office of a Clerke, resumed the shaven crowne which hee had forsaken without the counsell and advise of the Bishop. Leighton. Not farre from hence is Leighton, where Sir Gervase Clifton knight, lately made Baron Clifton, beganne to build a goodly house, and close to it lyeth Spaldwicke, which King Henry the First gave unto the Church of Lincolne for amends of a losse, when hee erected the Bishopricke of Ely, taken out of the Dio∣cesse of Lincolne, as I have before shewed. But where the River Nen entreth into this Shire, Elton. it runneth fast by Elton the seat of the ancient Family of the Sapcots, where is a private Chappell of singular worke∣manship and most artificiall glasse windowes, erected by Lady Elizabeth Dinham the widow of Baron Fitz-warin, married into the said Family. But a little higher, there stood a little City more ancient than all these, Walmsford. neere unto Walmsford: which Henry of Huntingdon calleth Caer Dorm and Dormeceaster upon the River Nen, and reporteth to have beene utterly rased before his time. Durobrivae. This was doubtlesse that DUROBRI∣VAE, that is, The River passage, that Antonine the Emperour speaketh of, and now in the very same sense is called Dornford neere unto Chesterton, which beside peeces of ancient Coine daily found in it, sheweth apparant tokens of a City overthrowne. For, to it there leadeth directly from Huntingdon a Roman Portway: and a little a∣bove Stilton, Stilton. which in times past was called Stichilton, it is seene with an high banke, and in an ancient Saxon Charter termed Ermingstreat. Ermingstreet This Street now runneth here through the middest of a foure square Fort, the North side whereof was fensed with Wals, all the other sides with a Rampire of earth onely. Neere unto which were digged up not long since Cofins or Sepulchres of stone in the ground of R. Be∣vill, of an ancient house in this Shire. Some verily thinke that this City tooke up both bankes of the River; Caster in Northampton-shire. and there bee of opinion that the little Village C ster standing upon the other banke was parcell thereof. Surely to this opinion of theirs maketh much the testimony of an ancient story, which sheweth that there was a place by Nen called Dormund-caster, in which when Kinneburga had built a little Monastery, it began to be called first Kinneburge-caster, and afterwards short Caster. This Kinneburga the most Christian daughter of the Pagan King Penda, and wife to Alfred King of the Northumbrians ( changed her Princely State into the service of Christ, if I may use the words of an ancient Writer) and governed this Monastery of her owne, as Prioresse or mother of the Nunnes there. Which afterwards, about the yeare of Salva∣tion 1010. by the furious Danes was made levell with the ground. But where this River is ready to leave this County, it passeth hard by an ancient house called Bottle-bridge (so is it now termed short for Botolph-bridge ) which the Draitons and Lovets brought from R. Gimels by hereditary succession into the Family of the Shirleies. Bottle Bridge. And to this house adjoyneth Overton, now corruptly called Orton, which being by felo∣ny forfait and confiscate, Nigellus. Neele Lovetoft redeemed againe of King John: and the said Noeles sister and coheire being wedded unto Hubert aliàs Robert de Brounford, brought him children, who assumed unto them the sirname of Lovetoft. Earles of Hun∣tingdon. This County of Huntingdon when the English-Saxons Empire began now to decline, had Siward an Earle by Office, and not inheritance: For as yet there were no Earles in England by inheritance, but the Rulers of Provinces, after the custome of that age were termed Earles, with addition of the Earledome of this or that Pro∣vince whereof they had the rule for the time: as this Siward whiles he governed this County was called Earle of Huntingdon ; whereas afterwards being Ruler of Nor∣thumberland, they named him Earle of Northumberland. See the Earles of Northamp∣ton. He had a sonne named Wal∣deof, who under the Title of Earle had likewise the government of this Province, standing in favour as he did with William the Conquerour whose Niece Judith by his sister of the mothers side, hee had married, but by him beheaded for entring into a conspiracy against him. In the last booke cap. 16. Iohn Forden in Scotocronico l. 8. c. 3.6. & 39. The eldest daughter of this Waldeof (as William Gemiticensis reporteth) Simon de Senlys or S. Liz tooke to wife, together with the Earldome of Hun∣tingdon, and of her begat a sonne named Simon. But after that the said Simon was dead, Da∣vid brother to Maud the Holy, Queene of England (who afterwards became King of Scots) married his wife by whom hee had a sonne named Henry. But in processe of time, as fortune and Princes favour varied, one while the Scots, another while the Sent Lizes enjoyed this dignity: First Henry the sonne of David aforesaid: then Simon S. Liz sonne of Simon the first: after him Malcolm King of Scots, sonne to Earle Hen∣ry: and after his death Simon Sent Liz the third who dying without issue, William King of Scots and brother to Malcolm succeeded: for, so wrote he that then lived, Raphe de Diceto in the yeare 1185. When Simon (saith hee) the sonne of Earle Simon was departed without children, the King restored the Earldome of Huntingdon with the Perti∣nences unto William King of the Scots. Then his brother David, and Davids sonne John sirnamed Scot, Mat. Paris. 1243. Earle of Chester, who dying without issue, and Alexander the third that had married the daughter of our King Henry the Third, having for a time borne this Title, the Scots by occasion of incident warres, lost that honour, and with it a very faire inheritance in England. A good while after King Edward the Third created Sir William Clinton Earle of Huntingdon who dyed issuelesse: And in his roome there was placed by King Richard the Second, Guiseard of Engolisme, a Gascoine, who was his Governour in his minority: and after his death succee∣ded Iohn Holland, * Iohn his sonne (who was stiled Duke of Excester, Earle of Hunting∣don and Ivory, See Dukes of Excester. Pa . 26. H. 6. Lord of Sparre, Admirall of England and Ireland, Lieutenant of Aquitane, and Constable of the Towre of London ) and his sonne likewise Henry, successively, who were Dukes also of Excester. This is that very same Henry Duke of Excester whom Philip Comines, as himselfe witnesseth, saw begging bare foote in the Low Countries, whiles he stood firme and fast unto the house of Lancaster, albeit he had married King Edward the Fourth his owne sister. Then Thomas Grey, who became afterward Marquesse Dorset, a little while enjoyed that honour. Also it is evident out of the Records, that William Herbert Earle of Pembroch brought in againe the Charter of creation, whereby his father was made Earle of Pembroch, into the Chancery for to be cancelled: and that King Edward the Fourth in the seventeenth of his Raigne created him Earle of Huntingdon, at such time as he granted the Title of Pembroch to the Prince his sonne. Afterward King Henry the Eighth conferred that honour upon George Lord Hastings: after whom succeeded his sonne Francis, and after him likewise his sonne Henry, a right honourable Personage, commended both for true Nobility and Piety. But whereas hee dyed without issue, his brother Sir George Hastings succeeded: and after him his Grandchilde Henry by his sonne, who at this day enjoyeth the said honour. In this little Shire are numbered Parishes. 78. CORITANI. N Ow must wee passe on to the CORITANI, who beyond the ICENI dwelling further within the Land, and sprea∣ding themselves very farre through the Mediterranean part of the Island, inhabited as farre as to the German O∣cean, to wit in these Countries which now are commonly called NORTHAMPTON-SHIRE, LEICE∣STER-SHIRE, RUTLAND-SHIRE, LINCOLN-SHIRE, NOT∣TINGHAM-SHIRE, and DERBY-SHIRE. With the Etymology of this their name I will not once meddle, for feare least putting downe in∣certainties for certaine and undoubted trueths, I may seeme to slip into an errour. For, although this People were spread farre and wide, which GUR-TATI signifieth in the British tongue, yet if I would boldly avouch, that these were thence called CORITANI, should I not play hazard at all aventure? Let them, for mee, guesse more safely, who can more happily. As for mee, I will in the meane time according to my purpose survey as diligently as I may these shires which I have now named, each one by it selfe orderly in their se∣verall places. NORTHAMTONIAE COMITATVS DESCRIPTIO IN QVO CORITANI OLIM IN SEDERVNT NORTHAMPTON-SHIRE. T His County of NORTHAMPTON, in the English-Saxon tongue , and Northanton-shire, commonly called Northampton-shire, situate in the very middle and heart, as it were, of England, from the South-West side, where it is broadest, drawing it selfe narrower by little and little, reacheth out in length to the North-East. On the East lie Bedford and Huntingdon-shires: on the South Buckingham and Oxford∣shires: Westward Warwickshire: and Northward Rutland∣shire, and Lincoln-shire, separated from it by Avon the lesse, and Welland, two Ri∣vers. The East side thereof, from Ouse to Dowbridge, one of the Romane high waies which they call Watling-streat runneth through: The middle and East part the Ri∣ver Nen, which by Writers is named also Aufona, with his gentle streame parteth in twaine. A champian countrey it is, exceeding populous, and passing well furnished with Noblemens and Gentlemens houses, replenished also with Townes and Chur∣ches, in so much as in some places there are twenty, and in others thirty Steeples with Spires or square Towres within view at once. The Soile very fertile both for tillage and for pasture, yet nothing so well stored with Woods, unlesse it bee in the further and hither sides. But in every place, as elsewhere also in England, it is over-spred and as it were beset with Sheepe: Utopia of Sir Thomas More. which according as that Hythodaus merrily said, Were wont to bee so gentle and fed with so little; but now in our daies, as the report goes, beginne to bee so ravenous and wilde, that they devour men, they waste and depo∣pulate fields, houses, and Towneships. On the South border, where the River Ouse so often mentioned first springeth, in a place rising with an easie ascent, and out of which there walme Springs in great plen∣ty, standeth Brakley, as one would say a place full of Brake or Ferne, in old time a fa∣mous Mercat Towne and staple as it were for wool: which how large and wealthy it was, it maketh now demonstration to travailers, only by the ruines thereof; and by a Major, whom it hath for the chiefe Magistrate. The Zouches Lords of the place, founded a College there: from whom it came successively as a possession in marri∣age right unto the Hollands and the Lovels. But when Lord Lovell in King Henry the Seventh his time was attainted, the Stanleies became Lords of it by the Kings gift. But the College there, at this day ruinous, belongeth to the Students of Mawdlen College in Oxford, who use it for a retyring place. Neither came this place to the least name and reputation that it had, by occasion of the memory of Saint Rumbald a young Infant, who as wee finde written in his life, being a Kings sonne, so soone as ever he was borne, after he had spoken I know not what holy words, and professed himselfe to be a Christian, was forthwith baptised, and so presently dyed, and being canonized by the people amongst the Saints, had his commemoration kept both here and at Buckingham. From hence Northward, when we had gone six miles forward, and all the way well wooded, first we saw Astwell, where Sir T. Billing sometime Lord chiefe Justice in the Kings Bench with great state dwelt: from whom it descended hereditarily to the Shirleis by the ancient Family of the Lovels: then Wedon and Wapiham, which the Family of the Pinkeneys held by Barony, Barony of the Pinkeneys. untill that H. de Pinkney ordained King Ed∣ward the First his heire. Whom being a right good and excellent Prince many evill men made their heire; whereas (according to Tacitus ) a good father maketh no Prince, but a bad one his heire. Then came we straight waies to TRIPONTIUM, which Antonine the Emperour mentioneth, though not in due place: For, I am of opinion, that this was the very same, which now we call Torcester: and to prove it, there be some arguments of moment as yet remaining. If Trimontium in Thracia had that name of three hils, Triturrita in Tuskane of three Towres, and Tripolis like∣wise of three Cities conjoyned in one; I have no reason to doubt, that this TRIPON∣TIUM of ours, might be so called of three Bridges. And heere at this Torcester the Roman Port way which in many places most evidently sheweth it selfe betweene it and Stony stratford, is cut through by three speciall Chanels or streames that the little Ri∣ver there divideth it selfe into; which in times past, like as at this day had of necessi∣ty there severall Bridges over them. Now, if you ask a Britain, how he saith in British [ Three Bridges ] you shall heare him by and by answer [ Taer ponte ]: and there be cer∣taine honest men, from whom I have received heere peeces of Romane Coine, that constantly avouch, the true name of this place to be Torcester, and think it was so cal∣led of Towres. Howbeit Marianus nameth it Touecester, if the booke be not faulty, in whom we read, that this towne was so fortified in the yeer of our Redemption 917. that the Danes by no meanes could winne it by assault: and that King Edward the el∣der afterwards compassed it about with a stone Wall; yet wee with all our seeking could see no tokens of any such Wall. Only there is a Mount remaining cast up with mens hands, they call it Berihill, now turned into private mens Gardens, and planted on every side with Chery trees. And very time it selfe hath so conquered and subdu∣ed the towne, that beholden it is to the situation, to the name, and old Coines other whiles heere found, for that esteeme which it hath of antiquity. For, no memorable thing there is in it but one onely Church that it hath; and the same is a large and faire building, wherein D. Sponde sometime the Parson thereof, by report, a good be∣nefactor to Church and towne both, lieth entombed within a tombe of fine and cu∣rious workemanship. But hard by, at Easton-Nesson, there is to bee seene, a faire and beautifull dwelling house belonging to the Knightly Family of the Farm rs. The River that watereth Torcester, as it goeth from hence toward Ouse, runneth be∣side Grafton, which now is reputed an Honor of the Kings, but in times past was the seat of the Family de Widdevil: out of which came Richard, a man highly renowned for his vertue and valour: who for that he tooke to wife Iaquet the widow of John Duke of Bedford, and daughter to Peter of Luxenburgh, Earle of Saint Paul, without the Kings licence, was by King Henry the Sixth fined at a thousand pounds of our mo∣ney. Yet afterwards he advanced the same Richard to the honorable Title of Baron Widdevil de Rivers. With whose daughter Dame Elizabeth, King Edward the Fourth secretly contracted marriage: Parliament 27. H. 6. and verily hee was the first of all our Kings since the Conquest that married his subject. But thereby, he drew upon himselfe and his wives kinsfolke a world of troubles, as yee may see in our Histories. The said Richard Wid∣devil Lord of Rivers, Grafton, and de la Mote, by king Edward the Fourth now his son in Law, was erected (these be the very words out of the Charter of his creation) to be Earle Rivers, by cincture of the sword, To have unto him and his heires, with the Fee of 20. pounds, by the hands of the Sheriffe of Northampton. And soone after he was with exceeding great honour ordained High Constable of England, (I speake out of the kings Patent it selfe) To occupy, manage, and execute that Office, either by himselfe, or by sufficient Deputies for terme of life, receiving yearely two hundred pounds out of the Exchequer, 7. Edw. 4. Constable of England. with full power and authority to take examinations, and to proceede in Causes of and concerning the crime of high Treason, or the occasion thereof: also to heare, examine, and in due time to determine the causes and businesses aforesaid, with all and singular matters arising from them, incident to them, or conjoyned therewith, even summarily, and in any place whatsoever below, without noise or formall order of Iudgement, onely upon sight of the Truth of the fact, and with the Kings hand and power, if it shall be thought meete in our behalfe, without all appeale. Moreover about that time he was made Lord Treasurer of England. But he having enjoyed these honours a small while, was soone after in the quarrell of the king his sonne in Law, aforesaid, taken in the battaile at Edgcote, and beheaded. And albeit, in his sonnes this offspring, as it were halfe dead, tooke an end, what time as Anthony Earle Rivers was by Richard the third made shorter by the head, Richard also and his other brethren dead without issue: yet from the daugh∣ters there did spred forth most faire and fruitfull branches. For, out of them flowred the royall Race and line of England, the Marquesses of Dorset, the Earles of Essex, Earles of Arundel, Earles of Worcester, Earles of Derby, the last Duke of Buckingham, and Barons of Stafford. Just behinde Grafton lieth Sacy Forrest stored with Deere and fit for game. Sacy Forest. Foresta de Salceto. More Eastward, the Country all over is besprinkled with Villages and little Townes, a∣mong which, these are of greatest name, Blisworth, the habitation of the Wakes de∣scended from that honorable race of the Barons of Wake and Estotevile: Pateshull, which gave name to the most worshipfull family in times past of the Pateshuls: Greenes-Norton, so named of the Greenes men in the fore-going age right famous for their wealth: But it was called in foretime (if I be not deceived) Norton Dany, which those Greenes held by knights service, as also a moity of Asheby Mares in this County, by service, Fines 18. Rich. 2. To lift up their right hand toward the King upon Christmas-day every yeare, where∣soever the King shall bee in England. Also Wardon, an Hundred, which had Lords de∣scended from Sir Guy of Reinbudcourt a Norman, whose inheritance came by the Fol∣liots to Guiscard Leddet, whose Daughter Christian bare unto her husband Henry de Braibrooke many children: yet Guiscard the eldest of them tooke to him the sirname of Leddet from his mother. But shortly after, those faire lands and possessions were by the females parted betweene William and Iohn, both Latimers of Corby. From Iohn, the Griphins in this Shire, and from William those Latimers, Barons of good antiquity, in York-shire, deduced their Descent. Higher into the Country Northward is the head of the River Aufona (for Avon in the British tongue is a generall name of all Rivers) which the people dwelling there∣by call Nen: and from the West side of the Shire, holdeth on his course with many reaches of his bankes, after a sort through the middle part of this Shire; and all the way along it doth comfortable service. A notable River, I assure you, and if I have a∣ny sight into these matters, fortified in times past with garisons by the Romans. For, when as that part of Britain on this side the River, was now in Claudius the Emperors time brought subject to the Romane government, so as the Inhabitants thereof were called Socij Romanorum, that is, the Romans consorts or associates, and the Britans dwelling beyond the river oftentimes invaded this their country, and with great violence made incursions, and spoiled much: when as also that the Associates themselves who could better endure the Romans commands, than brooke their vices, other whiles conspi∣red with those on the further side of the River: P. Ostorius (as saith Tacitus ) cinctos ca∣stris Antonaem ( Aufonas I would reade if I might be so bold) & Sabrinam cohibere pa∣rat, that is, if I understand the place a right, Hee by placing Forts and Garisons, hard by the Rivers Antonae, or Aufona rather, and Severn, determined to restraine and keepe in those Britans on the further side; and these that were Provincials and associates, from conjoyning their forces together, and helping one another against the Romans. Now what River this ANTONA should be no man is able to tell. Lip∣sius the very Phoebus of our age hath either driven away this mist, or else verily a cloud hath dimmed mine eye-sight. He pointeth with his finger to Northampton ; and I am of opinion that this word Antona is closely crept into Tacitus, in stead of Aufona, on which Northampton standeth. For the very navill, heart and middle of England is counted to be nere unto it, where out of one hill spring three great Rivers running divers wayes: Cherwell into the South; Leame, Westward, which as it maketh speed to Severn, is straight wayes received by a second Aufon ; and this Aufona or Nen Eastward. Of which, these two Aufons so crosse England overthwart, that who∣soever comes out of the North parts of the Island must of necessity passe over one of these twaine. When Ostorius therefore had fortified Severne, and these two Au∣fons, he had no cause to feare any danger out of Wales, or the North parts, to befall unto his people, either Romans or associates; who at that time had reduced the nerest and next part of the Island onely into the forme of a Province: as else where Tacitus himselfe witnesseth. Some of these Forts of Ostorius his making, may those great for∣tifications and military Fenses seeme to bee, which are heere seene at Gildsborough and Dantrey, betweene the Springheads of the two Aufons which run divers waies, and where onely there is passage into the hither part of Britaine without any rivers to hinder it. That fort at Gildsborough, is great and large, but this at Dantrey is greater and larger: For, being foure square, upon an high hill from whence all the country beneath may bee seene farre every way about, and having on the East side a Mount, which they call Spelwell, it encloseth within a banke cast up by mans hand, more than one hundred acres of ground or thereabout. Within which the country people other whiles finde coined peeces of money of the Roman Emperors, as proofes of the an∣tiquity thereof. Much deceived are they therefore, who will needs have it to bee a worke of the Danes, and that of them, the towne under it, was named Dantrey: which being a through-fare well knowne at this day by reason of the Innes there, had a religious house of the Austen Friers, that Sir H. de Fawesley founded, as I have read. At the head of Aufona or Nen, standeth Catesby that gave name to an ancient Fa∣mily, but now of foule tainted memory, for a most horrible and damnable com∣plot, never in any age exampled, which that Robert Catesby of Ashby S. Leger, the shame and indelible staine of his house and name, detestably breathing forth savage cruelty in barbarous wise, and compassing impiously the destruction of Prince and Country, devised lately under a specious pretext of Religion. Of whom, let all times be silent, least by making mention of him, the foule staine and blot of our age appeare unto Posterity; at the naming whereof we cannot chuse but with horror grieve and groane againe, seeing the very dumbe and livelesse crea∣tures seeme to be moved and troubled at so hellish Villany imagined by him and his complices. Hard by it, is Fawesley, where have dwelt a long time the Knightleies worshipfull Knights descended from those more ancient Knightleies of Gnowshall in the County of Stafford: and more Eastward hard by Nen, as yet very small, there is Wedon in the street, sometimes the royall seat of Wolpher K. of the Mercians, and converted into a Monastery by his daughter Werburg a most holy Virgine: of whose miracles in driving away Geese from hence, some credulous writers have made many a tale. Verily I should wrong the Truth, if I should not thinke, (albeit I have thought other∣wise) that this Wedon is the very station that Antonine the Emperour nameth BAN∣NAVENNA, BENNAVENNA, Bannavenna, which untruly is called, Isan∣naventa and Isanavatia. BENNAVENTA, and once corruptly ISANNAVENTA; not∣withstanding there now remaine no expresse tokens of that name, considering how Time changeth all, both names and things. For the distance from the next stations and baiting Townes which were in ancient times, answereth just: and in the very name of BANNAVENNA, the name of the River Aufon, the head whereof is neere unto it in some sort doth plainly discover it selfe. Likewise, the high Port-way or Ro∣mane street goeth directly from hence Northward with a bridge or causey oft broken and worne out; but most of all over against a Village named Creek, where it was of necessity that there should be a bridge; but in other places the bridge sheweth it selfe also as farre as to Dowbridge, neere Lilborne most apparantly. Somewhat more Northward wee saw Althorp, the habitation of the Spensers knights, allied to very many and those most honorable and worshipfull families: out of which house Sir Robert Spenser the fifth Knight in a successive continued Descent, a respe∣ctive lover of vertue and learning, was by our most gracious Soveraigne King James advanced to the honour of Baron Spenser of Wormeleighton. Althorp, or Oldthorp. Baron Spenser. Sir Christo∣pher Hatton. He died anno 1591. Hard by Althorp, Hol∣denby house, a faire patterne of stately and magnificent building maketh a faire glo∣rious shew, which Sir Chistopher Hatton one of Queene Elizabeths Privie Councell, Lord Chancellor of England, and knight of the Order of the Garter, built upon the lands and inheritance of his great grandmother, heire unto the Family of the Holden∣beis, for the greatest and last monument, (as himselfe afterwards was wont to say) of his youth: A man, to say nothing of him but that which in truth is due, for Religion and godlinesse right devout, of approved faithfulnesse to the State, of incorrupt equi∣ty: for almesdeeds of all others most bountifull; and one (which is not the least part of his praise) that was most willing and ready to support and maintaine learning. Who, as he lived a godly life, so as godly he slept in Christ: yet his commendation made knowne by the lightsome testimony of letters, shall shine forth more cleerely than by that gorgeous Monument right well beseeming so great a Personage, which Sir William Hatton, his adopted sonne, consecrated to his memory, in the Church of Saint Paul in London. Beneath these places Nen passeth on forward with a still and small streame, Northampton. and anone taketh in a small Brooke from the North, and is thereby augmented: where, at the very meeting and confluence of both, a City called after the River Northa∣fandon, and short, Northampton, is so seated, that on the West side it is watered with the Brooke, and on the South side with the foresaid Nen. Which City I was of late easily induced to guesse, to have beene that ancient BENNAVENTA; but if my conjecture missed the trueth, the confession of my errour may salve it. As for the name, it may seeme to haue beene imposed of the situation thereof upon the North banke of the River Aufon. The City it selfe which seemeth to have beene built all of stone, is, I assure you, for houses very faire, for circuit of good largenesse, and walled about: and from the Wall yee have a goodly prospect every way to a wide and spacious plaine Country. On the West side, 1075. Register of Saint An∣drewes. it hath an old Castle, and the very antiquity thereof giveth a grace unto it, built by Simon de Sancto Lizio, commonly called Senlyz, the first of that name Earle of Northampton: who also joyned unto it a beautifull Church called Saint Andrews, for a place of his owne buriall: and, as men say, reedified the Towne: Simon also the younger, his sonne, founded without the Towne a Monastery commonly called De Pratis. De la prey, for Nunnes. During the Saxons Heptarchie, it seem∣eth to have lien forlorne and of none account, neither have Writers made any where mention of it, in all those depredations of the Danes, unlesse it were when Swe∣no the Dane in a furious and outragious moode made most cruelly havocke through∣out all England: for then, as Henry of Huntingdon recordeth, it was set on fire and burnt to the ground. In the Raigne of Saint Edward the Confessour, there were in it, as we finde in the Survey Booke of England, LX. Burgesses in the Kings Domaine, having as many Mansions: Of these, in King William the Conquerours time, Foure∣teene lay waste and voide, and forty seaven remained. Over and above these, there were in the new Burrough forty Burgesses in the Domaine of King William. After the Nor∣mans time, it valiantly withstood the Siege layed unto it by the Barons, when they disquieted and troubled the whole Realme with injurious wrongs and slaughters, being maliciously bent against King John for private causes; which notwithstanding they so cloked with pretenses of Religion and the common good, that they tear∣med themselves, Gods hoast or Army. The Army of God and the holy Church ; at which time, they say, that Trench and Rampire was made, which they call Hunshil: but it stood not out with like successe against Henry the third their lawfull King, as it did against these rebels: for, when those Barons being nuzzelled up in sedition, and rebellion, from hence dis∣plaied their banners and sounded the battaile against him, he made a breach through the Wall, and soone wonne it by assault. After this, diverse times, like as before the kings held their Parliaments here, because it standeth very nere in the midst of Eng∣land: and in the yeere after Christ was borne 1460. here was a wofull and bloody field fought; wherein (such was the civill division of England in it selfe) Richard Nevil Earle of Warwick, after many a noble man slaine, led away captive that most unhappy king Henry the Sixth in a piteous spectacle, who was now the second time taken prisoner by his subjects. To conclude, the Longitude of Northampton our Mathematicians have described by 22. degrees and 29. scruples: and the Latitude by 52. degrees and 13. scru∣ples. From hence Nen maketh haste away by Castle Ashby, where Henry L. Compton be∣gan to build a faire sightly house: * close unto which lieth Yardley Hastings, so named of the Hastings, Yardley. Lord Parr of Horton. sometimes arles of Pembroch, unto whom it belonged. And to turne a little aside, I may not omit Horton, when as king Henry the Eighth created Sir W. Par Lord thereof, unckle and Chamberlaine to Queene Catharin Par, Baron Par of Hor∣ton, which honor shortly vanished with him when he left only daughters, who were married into the families of Tresham, and Lane. But to returne: Nen goeth forward to Mercat Wellingborow, in old time Wedlingborough, and Wodlingborough, made a mercat by K. John at the suit of the Monks of Crowland ; where there runneth into it a Riveret comming downe by Rushton and Newton, belonging to the Treshams, by Geddington also where the King had a Castle, and where there remaineth yet a Crosse erected in the honour of Queene Aeleonor wife to King Edward the First: by Boughton the seat of the Montacutes Knights: Kettering. The booke of Inquisit. in the Exchequer. by Kettering a Mercat Towne well frequented, neere unto which standeth Rouwell much talked of for the horse Faire there kept: by Burton likewise the Barony (if I mistake not the name) of Alane de Dinant: For, king Henry the First gave unto him a Barony of that name in this Shire, for that in single fight he had slaine the French Kings Champion at Gizors: and by Harrouden, the Lord whereof named Sir Nicolas Vaulx Captaine of Guines in Picardy, Baron Vaulx. king Hen∣ry the Eighth created Baron Vaulx of Harrouden. From hence goeth the Aufon or Nen to Higham, a Towne in times past of the Peverels, Higham Fer∣rers. Matthew Parker. and after by them of the Ferrers, from whom it is named Higham Ferrers: who had heere also their Castle: the ruines and rubbish whereof are yet seene nere unto the Church. But, the excellent ornament of this place was Henry Chicheley Archbishop of Canterbury, who built All-soules College in Oxford, and another here, wherein he placed Secular Clerkes, and Prebendaries, and withall an Hospitall for the poore. Then runneth it by Addington the possession in old time of the Veres, and by Thorpston commonly called Thrapston, belonging likewise to them: and o∣ver against it Draiton, the house in the foregoing age of Sir H. Greene: but afterwards by his daughter, of John and Edward Staffords, Earles of Wiltshire ; but now the ha∣bitation of the Lord Mordaunt unto whom it descended hereditarily from those Greenes noble Gentlemen and of right great name in this Country in their time. Then runneth it, in manner round about a proper little Towne which it giveth name unto, Oundale. Oundale they now call it corruptly in stead of Avondale: where there is nothing worth sight, but a faire Church, and a free Schoole for the instruction of children, and an Almeshouse for poore people, founded by Sir William Laxton, some∣time Major of London. Barnwell. Neere adjoyning to this, stands Barnewell, a little Castle, which now of late Sir Edward Mont-acute of the ancient family of the Mont-acutes, as may be collected by his Armes, hath repaired and beautified with new buildings. In times past it was the possession of Berengary le Moigne, that is, Monke, and not, as some thinke, of Berengary of Touraine, the great Clerke, whose opinion of the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper, was condemned in a Synode of an hundred and thir∣teene Bishops assembled by the Bishop of Rome. Fotheringhay. After this, it passeth on by Fotheringhay Castle, environed on every side with most pleasant medowes, which in the Raigne of Henry the Third, when the strong holds encouraged the Lords and Nobles to revolt, William Earle of Aumarl surprised upon the sodaine, and laied all the Country about waste, as Mathew of Paris recordeth. At which time it belonged unto the Earles of Huntingdon who were of the royall Race of Scotland. A good while after, King Edward the Third assigned it, as it were, for an inheritance or appennage as the French tearme it, unto his sonne Edmund of Langley, Duke of Yorke, who reedified the Castle, and made the highest fortification or Keepe thereof in forme of an horse-fetter, which both of it selfe, and with a Faul∣con in it, was his Devise, or Emprese; as implying that hee was locked up from all great hope, as a younger brother. His sonne Edward Duke of Yorke in the second yeere of Henry the Fift his Raigne, and in the yeere of Christ 1415. (as appeareth by an inscription there in rude and barbarous Verses) founded a passing faire Col∣legiat Church, wherein himselfe, when he was slaine in the battaile at Ag ncourt, as also Richard Duke of Yorke, his brothers sonne, who lost his life at Wakefield, and his wife Cecily Nevil, Cecily Duch∣esse of Yorke. had stately and sumptuous Tombes, which were profanely subver∣ted together with the upper part of the Church, in King Edward the Sixth his time. Yet in memoriall of them, Queene Elizabeth comming thither commanded two Monuments to be erected in the nether part of the Church, that now standeth: which notwithstanding, (such was their pinching and sparing that had the charge of this worke) are thought scarce beseeming so great Princes descending from Kings, and from whom Kings of England are descended. The forme of the Keepe beforesaid built like a fetter-locke occasioneth mee to di∣gresse a little, * and I hope with your pardon, Fetter-locke. when the gravest Authours in as small matters have done the like: Edmund of Langley Duke of Yorke who built that Keepe, and garnished the glasse-windowes there with Fetter-lockes, when hee saw his sons being young scholers gazing upon the painted windowes, asked them what was La∣tin for a Fetter-locke? They studying and looking silently one upon another, not a∣ble to answer: If you cannot tell me, saith he, I will tell you, Hic, haec, hoc Taceatis, that is, Hic, haec, hoc, be silent and quiet: and therewithall added, God knoweth what may happen heereafter. This King Edward the Fourth his great Grand-childe reported publique∣ly, when he having attained the Crowne created Richard his younger sonne Duke of Yorke, and then commanding that hee should use for his Badge the Fetter-locke open to verifie the presage of his great Grand-father. But this by the way. The said Cecily mother to King Edward the Fourth saw plainly within the com∣passe of a few yeeres what disports unruly and powerfull Fortune (pardon the word, for I acknowledge that God ruleth all) maketh herselfe out of the miseries of the mighty. For she saw Richard Duke of Yorke her husband, even then when he thought himselfe sure of the Kingdome, and her sonne the Earle of Rutland, slaine together in a bloudy fought field, and some few yeeres after her eldest sonne Edward the Fourth enjoying the regall Crowne, deprived of the same, recovering it againe, and taken away by untimely death, when hee had before made away her second sonne and his owne brother George Duke of Clarence. After that, she saw her other sonne Richard Duke of Glocester aspiring to the Crowne and making way to it by that lamentable murdering of his Nephewes, and slandering of her his owne Mother, (for he charged her openly with the greatest dishonor incident to a Lady:) and afterward she saw him when he was possessed of the Kingdome, within a while slaine in battaile: And these her miseries were so linked together, that the longer she lived the greater sorrow she felt, and every day was more dolefull than other. As for that disastre which even heere befell unto another most mighty Prince Mary Queene of Scots, I had leifer it should be enwrapped up in silence, than once spoken of: Let it be forgotten quite, if it be possible: if not, yet be it hidden, as it may in silence. Under the best Princes some there are who being once armed with authority, know how by secret slights to set a goodly shew and faire pretense of conscience and Religion, thereby to cloke their owne private designes: And there be againe, that sincerely and from the heart tender true Religion, their Princes security, yea and (which is the highest rule and law of all) the publique safety. Neither can it bee denied, but that even the best Princes themselves are otherwhiles violently carried away, as good Pilotes with tempests, against their wils whither they would not. But what they doe as Princes and Kings, let us leave to God who onely hath power over Kings. Nen being now come unto the skirts of Huntingdon-shire, running under a faire stone Bridge at Walmesford, Durobrivae. passeth by DUROBRIVAE, a right ancient City, which being called in the English Saxon Tongue Dormancester, as I said before, tooke up a great space of ground on both bankes of the River in both Counties. For, Caster. the little Village Caster which stands a mile off from the River, may seeme to have beene a part of it, by the pavements there found, wrought checker wise with small square quarels; although on the Church wall we reade this inscription bearing date of a later time. XV. KL. MAII DEDICATIO HU∣JUS ECCLESIAE MCXXIIII. THE FIFTEENTH DAY BEFORE THE KALENDS OF MAY, IN THE YEERE ONE THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED TWENTY FOURE, [WAS] THE DE∣DICATION OF THIS CHURCH. And doubtlesse, of greater name and note it was: for in the corne fields ad∣joyning, which in steade of Dormanton, they call Normanton Fields, so many peeces of Romane Coine are turned out of the ground, that a man would verily thinke they had beene sowed there: and two Rode-wayes, whereof the Causeys are yet evident to bee seene, went from hence, the one called Forty-foot-way, be∣cause it was forty foot broade, unto Stanford: the other named Long-ditch and High-streat by Lollham-bridges, Lollham-Bridges. (bridges I assure you of great antiquity, whereof e∣leven arches are in sight, now chinking and chawning for age) through West Deeping, into Lincoln-shire. At the very division and parting of these two Port-waies stan∣deth Upton highly situate, Upton. whereupon it tooke also that name: where Sir Robert Wingfield Knight, descended from that ancient Family of the Wingfields, which hath brought forth so many worshipfull and worthy Knights, hath a faire house with most lovely walkes. Peterborough. From DUROBRIVAE the River Aufon or Nen passeth on to Peterburgh seated in the very angle or nouke of this Shire, where Writers report there hath beene a gulfe or whirlpole in the River, of exceeding great depth, called Medeswell, and a Towne hard by it named thereupon Medeswelhamsted and Medeshamsted ; which Towne, as wee reade in Robert de Swapham, was built in an excellent fine place, having of the one side fennes, and passing good waters, and of the other many goodly woods, medowes, and pastures: faire and beautifull to the eye every way, and not accessable by land save onely on the West side. The River Nen runneth by at the South side of the Burrough; in the middle of which River, there is a place as it were a gulfe so deepe and cold withall, that even in Sum∣mer no swimmer is able to ducke or dive unto the bothom. Yet is it never for all that frozen over in Winter: for there is a spring there, whence the water welleth out. This place they called in old time Meddeswell; untill that Wolpher King of the Mercians built there a Mo∣nastery in honour of Saint Peter. And seeing the place was all a marish ground, he lai∣ed the foundation, as that Robert writeth, with mighty huge stones, such as eight yoke of Oxen would hardly draw one of them, which I saw with mine owne eyes, saith he, when this Monastery was destroyed. Afterward, of this Monastery dedicated to Saint Peter, it began to bee called PETRIBURGUS, or PETROPOLIS, that is, Peterborow or Burgh, and the said Monastery was very famous and renowned. The originall oc∣casion, and the building whereof, I have thought it worth my labour briefly to put downe, out of the said Robert de Swapham, a Writer of good antiquity. Peada, the sonne of Penda, who was the first Christian King of the Mercians, in the yeere of grace 546. for the propagation of Christian Religion, laid the foundation of a Mo∣nastery at Medeshamsted in the Girvians or Fen-country, which hee could not finish, for that by the wicked practise of his mother, he was made away. After Peada succeeded his brother Wolpher, who being most averse from Christi∣an Religion, murdered Wolphald and Rufin his owne sonnes with cruell and barbarous immanitie, because they had devoted themselves unto Christ, and embraced his Religion. But himselfe some few yeeres after, embracing Christian Religion, for to expiate and wash away the staine of that his impiety with some good and godly worke, set in hand to build up this Monastery which his brother had be∣gunne: which through the helpe of his brother Aetheldred, of Kineburga also and Kineswith his sisters, being fully finished in the yeere of our Lord 633. hee consecrated unto Saint Peter, endowed it with ample Revenewes, and ordained Sexwulft a right godly and devout man (who principally advised him to this worke) the first Abbat thereof. This Monastery flourished afterward, and had the name and opinion in the world of great holinesse, for the space of two hundered and foureteene yeeres or thereabout, untill those most heavie and wofull times came of the Danes, who made spoile and waste of all: For, then were the Monkes massacred, and the Monastery quite overthrowne lay buryed, as one would say, many yeeres together in the owne rubbish and ruines. At the last, about the yeere of our Lord 960. Ethel∣wold Bishop of Winchester, who wholy gave himselfe to the furtherance of monasti∣call profession began to reedifie it, having the helping hand especially of King Ead∣gar, and Adulph the Kings Chancellour, who upon a pricke of conscience and deepe repentance, for that hee and his wife together lying in bed asleepe had overlaid and smothred the little infant their onely sonne, laid upon the reedifying of this mona∣stery all the wealth he had: and when it was thus rebuilt, he became Abbat thereof. From which time, it was of high estimation and name, partly for the great riches it had and in part for the large priviledges which it enjoyed: although in the reigne of William the Conquerour, Herward an Englishman being proclaimed trai∣tour and outlawed, made a rode out of the Isle of Ely and rifled it of all the riches that it had gathered together: Mont. Turold against whom Turold the Abbot, erected the fort Mont-Turold: Yet was it esteemed exceeding wealthy even unto our fathers daies, when, King Henry the Eighth thrust out the Monkes in all places, alleaging that they de∣clining from the ordinances, which those holy and ancient Monkes held, wasted in riot and excesse the goods of the Church, which was the Patrimony and inheritance of the poore; and in their places erected here a Bishopricke assigning thereunto this county and Rutland-shire for his Diocese: and placed withall a Deane and certaine Prebendaries. So that of a Monastery it became a Cathedrall Church; which if you well consider the building, is for the very antiquity thereof, goodly to behold. The forefront carieth a majesty with it, and the Cloisters are very large, in the glasse-windowes whereof is represented the history of Wolpher the founder, with the suc∣cession of the Abbots. Saint Maries Chappell is a goodly large building, full of curi∣rious worke, and the quire faire: wherein two as infortunate Queenes as any other, Katherine of Spaine repudiated by King Henry the Eighth, and Mary Queene of Scotland being enterred, found rest and repose there, from all their miseries. Beneath Peterburgh, The Fennes. the river Aufon or Nen, which by this time is gone from his spring-head much about forty five miles, and carrieth along with him all rils, brookes, and land flouds occasioned by raine, that he hath taken into his chanels, is divided sundry waies. And finding no way to cary his streame, by spreading his waters all abroad in winter time, yea and other whiles most part of the yeere, over∣floweth all the plaine country, so as it seemeth to be nothing but a vast sea lying even and levell, with some few Islands that beare up their heads and appeare aboue the water. The cause of such inundation the people inhabiting thereby, alleage to be this, for that of the three chanels or draines, by which so great store of water was wont to be issued into the sea, the first that went directly into the sea by Thorney Ab∣bay, and then a part by Clow Crosse and Crowland: the second also by the trench cut out by Morton Bishop of Ely, called the New leam, and then by Wisbich ; have a long time been forlet and neglected: and so the third which goeth downe by Horsey∣bridge, Witlesmer, Ramsey-mere and Salters-load, is not able to receive so much water: whereby it breaketh forth with more violence upon the flats adjoyning. And the country complaineth for trespasse done unto them, as well by those that have not scoured the said draines, as by them that have turned the same aside to their private uses: and as the Reatines said some time, so doe they, That Nature herselfe hath well provided for mans use; in that she hath given all rivers their courses, and issues; and as well their-inlets into the Sea, as their heads and springs. But thus much of this matter may seeme to some over-much. In this place is the County least in breadth: for betweene Nen and the River Welland the one limit on the North side, there are scarce five miles. Upon Welland, which Aethelward an old writer called Weolod, Braibroke. Lords of Braibroke. neere unto the spring head, is Braibrock Castle, built by Robert May, aliàs, De Braybroke, a most inward minion of King John: whose sonne Henry having married Christian Ledet an inheritrice of a great estate, his eldest sonne adopted himselfe into the surname of the Ledet: from one of whose Nieces by his sonne, as I said before, it came unto the Latimers, and by them unto the Griphins, whose inheritance now it is. Neere unto it among the woods I saw some few reliques of a Monastery, Pipwell. called in times past De Divisis, and afterward Pipwell ; which William Buttevillein founded in the reigne of Henry the Second for Cistertian Monkes. Rockingham. From thence might Rockingham bee seene, were it not for the woods, a Castle sometime of the Earles of Aumarle, built by King William the Conqueror, at what time it was a wast, (as we finde in his Domesday booke ) fortified with Rampier and Bulwarkes, and a duple range of Battlements, situate upon the side of an hill within a woody Forest, which thereupon is named Rockingham Forest. Haringworth. See Ashby De la Zouch, in Lei∣cester shire. Barons Zouch. After this it runneth beside Haringworth the seat in old time of the Cantlows and now of the Lord Zouch: who descended from Eudo a younger sonne of Alan de la Zouch, of Ashby De la Zouch, have growne up to a right honourable Family of Ba∣rons; whose honour and state was much augmented by marriage with one of the heires of De Cante∣lupo. Deane. Cantlow, as also with an other of Baron Saint Maur, who likewise drew his Pedegree from the heire of the Lord Zouch de Ashby, and the Lovels Lords of Castel-Cary in Somersetshire. Here also I saw Deane, belonging in ancient times to the Deanes, afterwards to the Tindals, which place is worth the remembrance, if it were but for this, that it is now a proper and faire dwelling house of the Brudenells: out of which Family Sir Edmund Brudenell, late deceased, was a passing great lover and admirer of venera∣ble Antiquity. Barons de Engain. The Family likewise of Engain, which was both ancient and ho∣nourable had their seat hereby at Blatherwic (where now the Staffords of knights de∣gree inhabite, who descended from Ralph the first Earle of Stafford ) and those En∣gaines changed their Castle named Humel before time, Or Hymell. into a Monastery called Finisheved. Their issue male failed about two hundred yeares since: but of their heires the eldest was wedded unto Sir Iohn Goldington, the second to Sir Laurence Pabenham, and the third to Sir William Bernak, all right worthy Knights. Apthorpe. Heere also is to bee seene Apthorp, the seat of a most worthy knight, Sir Anthony Mildmay, whose father Sir Walter Mildmay, late one of Queene Elizabeths Privie Counsell, for his vertue, wisdome, piety, and bounty to learning and learned men, by founding Emanuel College in Cambridge, hath worthily deserved to bee regi∣stred among the best men in this our age. Thornhaugh. Hard by standeth Thornhaugh sometimes belonging to the Family De Sancto Medardo, contracted into Semar , and now to the right honorable Sir William Russell, sonne to Francis Earle of Bedford descended from Semare, whom King James for his vertues and faithfull service in Ireland whiles hee was Lord Deputy there, ad∣vanced to the Dignity of Baron Russell of Thornhaugh. Welledon. Basset of Welledon. Neither is the Towne Welledon to bee passed over in silence, considering that it went in old time for a Barony, which by Mawde the Daughter and heire of Geffrey de Ridell (who together with King Henry the First his sonne was drowned) did descend to Richard Basset sonne of Ralph Basset, Lord Justice of England, in whose race it continued unto King Henry the Fourth his dayes: For then, by the females it accrued to the Kneveis and Alesburies. Welland being past Haringworth goeth to visit Colliweston, where Lady Marga∣ret Countesse of Richmond, King Henry the Seaventh his mother built a goodly faire and stately house: Under which, the neighbour inhabitants use to digge great plenty of sclate stones for their buildings. Slate-stones. From whence Wittering Heath, a plaine, runneth out farre into the East, wherein the people there dwelling, report, that the Danes long since were discomfited in a memorable battaile and put to flight. Burghley. Now by this time is Welland come to Burghley whereof the most prudent and right hono∣rable Councellour Sir William Cecil, Lord high Treasurer of England, yea a singu∣lar treasure and supporter of the same, received the Title of Baron Burghley, for his great good deserts, at the hands of Queene Elizabeth. Which Title hee ador∣ned with the lustre of his vertues, and beautified this place with magnificent sump∣tuous buildings, adjoyning thereto a large Parke encompassed about with a stone wall of a great circuite. Beneath it, there are ancient Quarries of stone at Bernack, out of which the Abbayes of Peterburgh and of Ramsey were built. For heere (to write the very words out of the History of Ramsey ) The toyling strength of the Quarriers is often tried and held to worke: yet ever still there remaineth worke for them behinde, wherein they being refreshed betweene whiles with rest, may bee exercised and kept in ure. And thus wee reade in the Charter of king Edward the Confessour: In con∣sideration of foure thousand Eeles in Lent, the Monkes of Ramsey shall have out of the Territory of Saint Peter so much square astiler stone, as they need, at Berneck, and of rough building stone for wals, at Burch. Under Berneck that high-way made by the Romanes, which the neighbour Inhabitants, Forti foot- of the breadth that it carrieth, call The forty foot-way, from Caster to Stanford cutteth and divideth this Shire, and is to bee seene with an high Causey, especially by the little Wood of Bernack, where it hath a Bea∣con set upon the very ridge, and so runneth forth along by Burghley Park wall toward Stanford. Some five miles hence, Maxey. Peag-Kyrk. Ingulfus. Welland running downe by Maxey Castle, belonging some∣time to the noble house of Wake, and by Peag-Kirk, (where, in the Primitive Church of the English Nation, Pega an holy woman who gave name to that place, and sister of Saint Guthlak, with other Nuns and devout virgins by their life and example gave good documents of piety and chastity; commeth to the Fennes so often mentioned. And for as much as the banke on the South side thereof is in many places neglected, the River lieth sore upon the lands thereabout with great detriment: and thus be∣ing put out of his owne Chanell that before time went by Spalding, he entreth closely into Nen or Aufon, and over-chargeth it exceedingly. Now the lesse Avon, which is the other of the limits, as I said, of this shire North∣ward, but serveth for a limit onely about five or six miles in length, breaking out of the ground at Avon-well by Naseby, neere by the Spring-head of Welland, runneth Westward by Suleby sometimes an Abbay of Black-Monkes, Stanford. and by Stanford upon Avon, The Caves. the habitation of the Caves Family, out of which there is spread a notable off∣spring with many branches in all that Tract adjoyning: also by Lilborne, the seate in times past of the Canvilles. Which, that it hath beene in old time a Mansion place or Station of the Romans, I am induced to thinke, by the site thereof hard by one of their Port-waies, by the ancient Trenches there, and a little piked hill cast up: into which when of late dayes some digged in hope of old hid treasure, in stead of gold they found coles. Bounds or Meere marl in old time. And when this river being as yet but small is once gone under Dow∣bridge, it leaveth Northampton-shire and entreth Warwick-shire. By those coles digged forth from under the said hill, what if I should conjecture that this hill was raised up for a limit or bound-marke, seeing Siculus Flaccus writeth, that either ashes, or coles, or pot-sherds, or broken glasses, or bones halfe burnt, or lime, or plaster, were wont to be put under land-markes and limits: Lib. de Civi Dei 21. cap. and S. Augustine writeth thus of coles: Is it not a wonderfull thing (saith hee) whereas considering Coles be so brickle, that with the least blow they breake, with the least crushing they are crushed; yet no time, bee it never so long conque∣reth them: in so much as they that pitch Land-markes and limits, were wont to couch them underneath, to convince any litigious fellow whatsoever, that should come never so long time after, and avouch that a limit was not there pitched. And so much the rather incline I to this my conjecture, because they that have written of limits, doe write that cer∣taine hillockes or piles of earth which they termed Botontines, Botontines Hence per∣venture our Buttin were set in limits: so that I suppose most of these mounts and round hils which we every where see and call Burrowes, were for this purpose raised, and that ashes, coles, pot-sherds, &c. may be found under them, if they were digged downe a good depth into the earth. The first Earle that this County had to my knowledge, Earles of Northamp was Waldeof (sonne of that warlike Siward ) who being also Earle of Huntingdon, for his disloyall treachery unto William the Conquerour, lost his head: leaving two daughters onely behinde him, by Iudith the Conquerours Niece by a sister of his mothers side. Simon de Saint Liz, The life of Waldeof. be∣ing scornfully rejected by Iudith the mother for that hee was lame-legged, married Mawd the eldest Daughter, and hee built Saint Andrewes Church and the Castle at Northampton. After him succeeded his sonne, Simon the second, who a long time was in suite about his mothers possessions with David King of Scots his mothers second husband: and having sided with King Stephen, in the yeere of our Lord 1152. depar∣ted this life with this testimoniall that went of him: A Youth full fraught with all un∣lawfull wickednesse, and as full of all unseemely lewdnesse. His sonne Simon the third, having gone to law with the Scots for his right to the Earldome of Huntingdon, wa∣sted all his estate, and through the gracious goodnesse of King Henry the Second, married the Daughter and Heire of Gilbert de Gaunt Earle of Lincolne: and in the end having recovered the Earledome of Huntingdon, and disseized the Scots, dyed childelesse in the yeare 1185. Whereas some have lately set downe Sir Richard Go∣bion to have beene Earle of Northampton afterward, I finde no warrant thereof ei∣ther in Record, or History: Onely I finde, that Sir Hugh Gobion was a Ringleader in that rebellious rable which held Northampton against king Henry the Third, and that the inheritance of his house came shortly after by marriage to Butler of Woodhall, and Turpin, &c. But this is most certaine that King Edward the Third created William de Bohun a man of approved valour, Earle of Northampton: and when his elder bro∣ther Humfrey de Bohun, Earle of Hereford and of Essex, High Constable also of Eng∣land, was not sufficient in that warlike age, to beare that charge of the Constable, he made him also High Constable of England. After him his sonne Humfrey succeeding in the Earledome of Northampton, as also in the Earledomes of Hereford and of Essex, for that his Unckle dyed with issue, begat two Daughters; the one bestowed in marriage upon Thomas of Woodstocke, the youngest sonne of King Edward the Third; the other upon Henry of Lancaster, Duke of Hereford, who afterwards attained to the Crowne by the name of King Henry the Fourth. The Daughter of the said Thomas of Woodstocke brought by her marriage this Title of Northampton with others, into the Family of the Staffords. But when they afterwards had lost their honours and dignities, King Edward the Sixth honoured Sir William Parr Earle of Essex, a most accomplished Courtier, with the Title of Marquesse of Northampton: who within our remembrance ended this life issuelesse. And while I was writing and perusing this Worke, our most sacred Soveraigne King James in the yeere of our Salvation 1603. upon one and the same day advanced Lord Henry Howard brother to the last Duke of Norfolke, a man of rare and excellent wit, and sweet fluent eloquence, sin∣gularly adorned also with the best sciences, prudent in counsell, and provident with∣all, to the state of Baron Howard of Marnehill, and the right honourable name, title, stile, and Dignity of Earle of Northampton. There belong unto this Shire Parishes 326. LECESTRIAE COMITATVS. SIVE Leicestershyre. PARS OLIM CORITANORVM. LEICESTER-SHIRE. O N the North side of Northampton-shire boundeth LEICE∣STER-SHIRE, called in that Booke wherein William the Conquerour set downe his Survey of England, Ledecester-shire: a champian Country likewise throughout, bearing corne in great plenty, but for the most part without Woods. It hath bordering upon it on the East side, both Rutland-shire and Lin∣coln-shire, on the North Nottingham and Derby-shires ; and Warwick-shire on the West. (For, the high Rode way made by the Romanes called Watling-streat, directly running along the West skirt, sepa∣rateth it from Warwick-shire: ) and on the South side, as I noted even now, lyeth Northampton-shire. Through the middle part thereof passeth the River Soar taking his way toward the Trent: but over the East-part a little River called Wreke gently wandereth, which at length findeth his way into the foresaid Soar. On the South side, where it is divided on the one hand with the River Avon the lesse, and on the other with the River Welland, we meet with nothing worth relation, unlesse it be, on Wellands banke, (whiles he is yet but small and newly come from his head) with Haverburgh commonly called Harborrow, a Towne most celebrate heere∣about for a Faire of Cattaile there kept: and as for Carleton, as one would say, the husband-mens Towne, (that is not farre from it) wherein (I wote not whether it be worth the relating) all in manner that are borne, whether it bee by a peculiar pro∣perty of the Soile, or the water, or else by some other secret operation of nature, have an ill favoured, untunable, and harsh manner of speech, fetching their words with very much adoe deepe from out of the throat, with a certaine kinde of wharling. That Romane streete way aforesaid, Watling street (the causey whereof being in some other pla∣ces quite worne and eaten away, heere most evidently sheweth itselfe) passeth on directly as it were by a streight line Northward, through the West side of this Pro∣vince. The very tract of which street I my selfe diligently traced and followed even from the Tamis to Wales, purposely to seeke out Townes of ancient memory: (laugh you will perhaps, at this my painfull and expencefull diligence, as vainly curious:) nei∣ther could I repose my trust upon a more faithfull guide for the finding out of those said townes which Antonine the Emperour specifieth in his Itinerary. This Street-way, being past Dowbridge, where it leaveth Northampton-shire behinde it, is interrupted, first with the River Swift, that is indeed but slow, although the name import swift∣nesse, which it maketh good onely in the Winter moneths. The Bridge over it now called Bransford and Bensford Bridge, which heere conjoyned in times past this way, having been of long time broken downe, hath beene the cause that so famous a way for a great while was the lesse frequented: but now, at the common charge of the country, Cester-Over. it is repaired. Upon this way lyeth of the one side, Westward, Cester-Over, (but it is in Warwick-shire ) a place worth the naming, were it but in regard of the Lord thereof Sir Foulke Grevill, a right worshipfull and worthy knight: although the very name it selfe may witnesse the antiquity, for, our ancestours added this word Cester to no other places but only cities. Cester. On the other side of the way Eastward, hard by water Swift which springeth neere Knaptoft the seat of the Turpins a knightly house descended from an heire of the Gobions, lieth Misterton belonging to the an∣cient family of the Poulteneis, who tooke that name of Poulteney a place now decaied within the said Lordship. Lutterworth. Neere to it is Lutterworth a Mercate Towne the possession in times past of the Verdons, which onely sheweth a faire Church which hath beene encreased by the Feldings of knights degree and ancient gentry in this Shire. That famous John Wickliffe was sometime Parson of this Church, John Wickli died 1387. a man of a singular, po∣lite, and well wrought wit, most conversant also in the holy Scripture: who for that he had sharpened the neb of his pen against the Popes authority, the Church of Rome, and religious men, was not onely in his life time most grievously troubled, but also one and forty yeeres after his death, his dead Corps was cruelly handled, being by warrant from the Councell of Siena turned out of his grave and openly burned. Nei∣ther is it to be forgotten that neere to this Towne is a spring so cold that within a short time it turneth strawes and stickes into stones. A spring tur∣ning strawes and stickes into stones. From that Bensford bridge, the foresaid old High way goeth on to High-crosse, so called, for that thereabout stood sometime a Crosse, in stead of which, is erected now a very high post with props and supporters thereto. The neighbours there dwel∣ling reported unto me, that the two principall High-waies of England did here cut one another overthwart, and that there stood a most flourishing City there, named Cleycester, Cley Cester. Cleybrooke. which had a Senate of Aldermen in it, and that Cleybrooke, almost a mile off, was part of it: also, that on both sides of the way, there lay under the furrowes of the corne fields great foundations and ground workes of foure square stone: also that peeces of Roman money were very often turned up with the Plough: although a∣bove the ground, as the Poet saith, Etiam ipsae periere ruinae, that is, Even the very ruines are perished and gone. These presumptions together with the distance of this place from BANNAVENTA or Wedon, which agreeth just, and withall the said Bridge, leading hitherward, called Bensford, are inducements unto me to thinke verily, that the station BENNONES, Bennones. or VENONES, was heere, which Antonine the Empe∣rour placeth next beyond BANNAVENTA, especially seeing that Antonine sheweth how the way divided it selfe heere into two parts, which also goeth com∣monly currant. For, Northeastward, where the way lieth to Lincolne, the Fosse way leadeth directly to RATAE and to VERNOMETUM, of which I will speake a∣non: and toward the Northwest, Watlingstreet goeth as streight into Wales by MAN∣VESSEDUM, whereof I shall write in his due place in Warwick-shire. Higher, yet neere the same streetside standeth Hinkley, which had for Lord of it, Hugh Grantmaismill, a Norman, high Steward or Seneschall of England, during the Raignes of king William Rufus, and Henry the First. The said Hugh had two daugh∣ters, Parnell, given in marriage to Robert Blanch-mains (so called of his faire white hands) Earle of Leicester, together with the High-Stewardship of England; and Alice, wedded to Roger Bigot. Verily, at the East end of the Church, there are to be seene Trenches and Rampires, yea and a Mount cast up to an eminent height, which the inhabitants say was Hughes Castle. Three miles hence standeth Bosworth, an anci∣ent Mercat Towne, which liberty together with the Faire S. Richard Harecourt obtai∣ned for it at the hands of king Edward the First. Under this towne in our great grand∣fathers daies the kingdome of England lay hazarded upon the chance of one battaile: For, Henry Earle of Richmond, with a small power encountred there in pitched field king Richard the Third, who had by most wicked meanes usurped the kingdome: and whiles he resolved to die the more valiantly, fighting for the liberty of his coun∣try, with his followers and friends, the more happy successe he had, and so overcame and slew the Usurper: 1487. Richard the Third slaine. and then being with joyfull acclamations proclaimed King in the very mids of slaughtered bodies round about; he freed England by his happy va∣lour from the rule of a Tyrant, and by his wisdome refreshed and setled it being sore disquieted with long civill dissentions. Whereupon Bernard Andreas of Tholous, a Poet living in those daies, in an Ode dedicated unto King Henry the Seventh, as touching the Rose his Devise, writ these Verses, such as they are: Ecce nunc omnes posuere venti Murmuris, praeter Zephyrum tepentem: Hic Rosas nutrit, nitidósque flores Veris amoeni. Behold now all the windes are laid, But Zephyrus that blowes full warme: The Rose, and faire spring-floures in mead He keepeth fresh, and doth no harme. Other memorable things there are none by this Street, unlesse it bee Ashby de la Zouch, that lyeth a good way off: a most pleasant Lordship now of the Earles of Huntingdon, * but belonging in times past to the noble Family De la Zouch, who de∣scended from Alan Vicount of Rohan, Barons Zouch. De Ashby. in Little Britaine, and Constantia his wife daugh∣ter to Conan le Grosse Earle of Britaine and Maude his wife the naturall daughter of Henry the First. Of this house Alane De la Zouch married one of the heires of Roger Quincy Earle of Winchester, and in her right came to a faire inheritance in this Country. But when hee had judicially sued John Earle of Warren, who chose rather to try the Title by the sword point than by point of Law, he was slaine by him even in Westminster Hall, in the yeere of our Lord 1269. and some yeeres after, the daughters and heires of his grand sonne transferred this inheritance by their marri∣ages into the Families of the Saint Maures, The family of the Hollands. of Castle Cary, and the Hollands. Yet their father first bestowed this Ashby upon Sir Richard Mortimer of Richards Castle his co∣zin, whose younger issue thereupon tooke the sirname of Zouch, and were Lords of Ashby. But from Eudo a younger sonne of Alane who was slaine in Westminster Hall, the Lords Zouch of Harringworth branched out, and have beene for many Descents, Barons of the Realme. Afterward in processe of time Ashby came to the Hastings, who built a faire large and stately house there, and Sir William Hastings procured un∣to the Towne the liberty of a Faire in the time of King Henry the Sixth. Here I may not passe over the next neighbour Cole-Overton, now a seat of the Beaumontes descen∣ded from Sir Thomas Beaumont Lord of Bachevill in Normandy, brother to the first Vicount. This place hath a Cole prefixed for the forename which Sir Thomas, as some write, was hee, who was slaine manfully fighting at such time as the French recove∣red Paris from the English in the time of King Henry the Sixth. This place of the pit-coles (being of the nature of hardned Bitumen, Pit-cole or stone cole. which are digged up to the pro∣fit of the Lord, in so great a number that they serve sufficiently for fewell to the neighbour Dwellers round about farre and neere. I said before that the River Soar did cut this Shire in the middle, which springing not farre from this Street, and encreased with many small rils and Brookes of running water, going a long Northward with a gentle streame, passeth under the West and North side of the cheife Towne or City of this County, which in Writers is called Lege-Cestria, Leicester. Leogora, Legeo cester, and Leicester. This Towne maketh an evident faire shew both of great antiquity and good building. In the yeere 680. when Sexwulph at the commandement of King Etheldred divided the kingdome of the Mercians into Bishoprickes, hee placed in this an Episcopall See, and was himselfe the first Bishop that sat there: but a few yeeres after, when the See was translated to another place, this Dignity had an end, and therewith the stately part of the Towne by little and little was empaired, untill that Edelfleda a most vertuous and noble Lady in the yeere after our Saviours Nativity 914. repaired and strongly walled it new about; in so much as Matthew of Paris in his lesser Story wrote thus, Legecester is a right wealthy City and notably well fenced with an indissoluble Wall, which if it had a strong foundation were infe∣riour to no City whatsoever. About the Normans entring into this Land, it was well peopled and frequented, yea and had very many Burgesses in it; out of whom they were bound by an ancient custome (as we reade in William the Conquerours booke) To send twelve with the King so often as he ent in person to the warres: But if hee made a voyage by sea against his enemies, they sent foure horses to carry armour as farre as to Lon∣don. This City paid yeerely to the King 30. pounds by tale, and twenty in ora, that is, Or in ore. by weight, also 25. measures called Sextaries of hony. But in the time of King Henry the Seconds Raigne, it was sore overpressed with a world of great and grievous calami∣ties, and the wals throwne downe, what time as Robert sirnamed Bossu, (that is, Crouch backe ) Earle of Leicester conspired and rebelled against the King. Which Matthew of Paris sheweth in these words: For the obstinate stubbornesse of Earle Robert spurning against the King, the noble City of Leicester was besieged and overthrowne by King Henry, and the Wall which seemed indissoluble, was utterly cast downe all round about. For, that I may adde thus much out of the lesser History abovesaid, when the Wall of the City wanting a good foundation was undermined, and the props that sustained it at length burnt, the peeces and fragments of the Wall fell downe, which even to this day (such is the in∣dissoluble tenacity and stifnesse of the morter) remaine fast, and retaine the bignesse of sound rockes. Miserable also was the imposition of a fine upon the Citizens at that time, and their banishment as lamentable; who having obtained by paying summes of money licence to depart, tooke Sanctuary for extreame feare in Saint Albans and Saint Ed∣mundsbury. The Castle likewise was dismantled of all Fortifications, which verily was a large and strong peece. Beneath which, there is a very faire Hospitall or house for receit of poore people, and a Collegiat Church wherein Henry Earle of Lanca∣ster, and Henry of Lancaster his sonne, who was the first Duke of Lancaster, lie buri∣ed. For, the said Duke when he was now stepped farre in yeeres, of a pious minde built this Hospitall for the maintenance of poore folke, and to that end dedicated it. Concerning which, Henry Knighton of Leicester who lived in that age, writeth thus in his story. Henry the first Duke of Lancaster built a Collegiat Church and an Ho∣spitall without the South Gate of Leicester; wherein hee ordained a Deane with 12. Canons Prebendaries, as many Vicars, and other Officers, an hundred poore and feeble people, and ten poore able women to give attendance upon the said feeble folke; and this Hospitall hee endowed with sufficient revenewes. * As for this Hospitall it continueth in some good state, as an other Bede-house in the Towne built by W. Wigeston. But the Collegiat Church which was a magnificent worke, and the greatest ornament of Leicester was demo∣lished when religious houses were granted to the King. At the other side of the City among most goodly and pleasant medowes which the River Soar watereth, there was an Abbay, called of that place, De Pree: of which, the said Knighton hath written thus, Robert de Bossu Earle of Leicester (when he begun Gerondon Abbay for Cistertians) founded the Monastery of S. Mary De Pratis, at Leicester, endowed it richly with Lands, Possessions and Revenewes, and himselfe with the consent of Amiciae. Amice his Wife became a Or Priest. Chanon Regular in the same, and, for the space of fifteene yeeres, in habite of a Chanon served God there, and so slept in the Lord ; That thus forsooth, he might make amends by repentance in a Chanons weed of that offence; which beforetime hee had committed by rebelling with a traiterous minde against his Liege Prince. What name Leicester had in the Romans time, it is not knowne; In the Catalogue of Ninnius, I thinke it to bee that, which is called Caer Lerion: But, that Leir a King, of whom there goe many tales, built it, they that will, may beleeve it for mee. But the situation thereof upon the Foss-way, and the distance both from BENNONES and VEROMETUM, agreeth so just with the description of An∣tonine, that I cannot but thinke it to be that RATAE which Ptolomee nameth RAGAE, although there is neither tippe nor toe remaining in it of the name RATAE: un∣lesse peradventure it be in that old long Ditch and Rampire which they call Raw∣dikes, Or Road dikes. scarce halfe a mile without the South Gate. Heere am I at a stand, and looke about me what way to follow for the seeking out of ancient Townes. Ranulph a Monke of Chester recordeth, that the ancient street way went through the wasts from hence to Lincolne, but hee telleth us not, through what Wasts. The common voice goeth that it went on still full North through Notting∣ham-shire: Antonine the Emperour (if I have any insight at all) seemeth to insinuate, that it passed North-Eastward through this County into Lincoln-shire. And verily, this way there are places of antique memory that by some of their remaines and tokens shew themselves: but the other way, I could not my selfe ever yet meete with any; what others have done I know not, and would willingly learne. North-West from Leicester, and not farre off is Grooby a large Lordship and Manor which from Hugh Grantmaismill whom King William the Conquerour had enriched with great possessions and revenewes, came by the Earles of Leicester, and the Quin∣cies, unto the house of the Ferrers: Ferrers and Greies de Grooby. out of which the Lord Ferrers of Grooby flourished a long time in the honorable state of Barons: and in the end, Isabel the only daugh∣ter remaining of the right line, brought it by her marriage into the name of the Greies, from whence it fell againe at the last by Attainder into the Kings hands. But whiles I was revising of this Worke, our Soveraigne Lord King James restored Sir Henry Grey a worthy Knight to the ancient honour of his noble Progenitors, crea∣ting him Baron Grey of Grooby in the first yeare of his Raigne. Now let us returne to the River Soar, Mont-Soar-hill. which being past Leicester, first giveth name to Montsorell, or rather Mont-Soar-hill, a name compounded of Norman and Eng∣lish both: which now is famous onely for a Mercate there kept: but in old time most renowned for the Castle, seated upon a steepe and craggy Hill, hanging over the Ri∣ver, which before time belonged to the Earles of Leicester, but afterwards to Saer de Quincy Earle of Winchester in the Barons warre; at this day nothing but a rude heape of rubbish: For, in the yeere 1217. the Inhabitants of the Towne, when af∣ter a long Siege they had wonne it, Historia Minor. rased it downe to the very ground, as being the Devils nest, and a Den of theeves, robbers, and rebels. Somwhat higher on the other side of the River standeth Barrow: where is digged lime, commended above all other for the strong binding thereof. After, some few miles from thence, Soar while hee seeketh Trent, leaveth Leicester-shire, * a little above Cotes now the habitation of the Family of Skipwith originally descended out of York-shire, Skipwith. and enriched many yeeres since with faire Possessions in Lincoln-shire, by an heire of Ormesbie. On the opposite banke of Soar standeth Lough-borrough a Mercate Towne, Lough-bor∣rough. which adorned one onely man with the name of Baron, to witte, Sir Edward Hastings ; and that in the Raigne of Queene Mary. But when shee, of whom he was most dearely loved, departed this life, hee taking a loathing to the World was not willing to live any longer to the World; but wholy desirous to apply himselfe to Gods Service, retired into that Hospitall which hee had erected at Stoke Pogeis in Buckingham-shire ; where with poore people hee lived to God, and among them finished the course of his life de∣voutly in Christ. That this Lough-borrow is that Towne of the Kings named in the Saxon Tongue , which as Marianus saith Cuthwulph tooke from the Bri∣tans in the yeere of Christ 572. the neere affinity of the name may yeeld some proofe. But now among all the Townes of this Shire it rightfully chalengeth the second place next unto Leicester, whether a man either regard the bignesse or buil∣ding thereof, or the pleasant Woods about it. For, within very little of it, the Fo∣rest of Charnwood or Charley stretcheth it selfe out a great way, Charnwood Forest. wherein is seene Beaumanour Parke, which the Lords of Beaumont (as I have heard) fensed round about with a stone Wall. These Beaumonts descended from a younger sonne of John Coun∣ty of Brene in France, who for his high honour, and true valour was preferred to marry the heire of the Kingdome of Jerusalem, * and with great pompe crowned King of Jerusalem in the yeere of our Lord 1248. De Bello monte. Beaumont. Hence it is that wee see the Armes of Jerusalem so often quartered with those of Beaumont in sundry places of England. Sir Henry Beaumont was the first that planted himselfe in England about the yeere 1308. who advanced to the marriage of an heire of Alexander Comine Earle of Boghan in Scotland (whose mother was one of the heires of Roger Quincy Earle of Winchester ) entred upon a very goodly and faire inheritance, and so a great Family was propagated from him. Hee in the Raigne of Edward the Third, for certaine yeeres was summoned to the Parliament, by the name of Earle of Boghan, and John Lord Beamont in the Raigne of Henry the Sixth was for a time Constable of England, and the first to my knowledge, that in England received at the Kings hands the state and Title of a Vicount. The first Vi∣count of Ho∣nor in Englan But when William the last Vicount was dead without issue, his sister was wedded to the Lord Lovell, and the whole inheritance afterwards, which was rich and great, by attainder of Lovell fell into the hands of King Henry the Seventh. In this North part we meete with nothing at all worth the naming, unlesse it be a little religious house, which Roise Verdon founded for Nunnes and called it Grace-Dieu, now belonging to a younger house of the Beaumonts: and where the Trent runneth, hard by, Dunnington. is Dunnington, an ancient Castle built by the first Earles of Leicester: which afterwards came to John Lacy Earle of Lincolne, who procured unto it from King Ed∣ward the First the priviledge of keeping a Mercate and Faire. But when as in that great proscription of the Barons under King Edward the Second the hereditaments of Thomas Earle of Lancaster, and Alice Lacy his Wife were seised into the Kings hands, and alienated in divers sorts, the King enforced her to release this Manour unto Hugh Le Despenser the younger. The East part of this Shire which is hilly and feedeth great numbers of Sheepe, was adorned with two places of especiall note; Vernometum or Verometum. VERNOMETUM or VERO∣METUM, whereof Antonine the Emperour hath made mention, and Burton-La∣zers, both in the ages fore-going of very great name and reputation. VERNOME∣TUM, which now hath lost the name, seemeth to have stood (for I dare not affirme it) in that place, which at this day men call Burrowhill and Erd-burrow: For, betweene VEROMETUM and RATAE, according to Antonine his reckoning are twelve Italian miles; and so many well neere there be, from Leicester to this place. The name Burrow also that it hath at this day came from , which in the Sax∣on Tongue signifieth, a place fortified, and under it a Towne called Burrough be∣longing to an old Family of Gentlemen so sirnamed. But, (that which maketh most for proofe) in that very place there riseth up an hill with a steepe and upright ascent on every side, but South Eastward: in the top whereof appeare the expresse tokens of a Towne destroyed, a duple Trench, and the very Tract where the Wals went, which enclosed about eighteene Acres of ground within. At this day it is arable ground, and is nothing so famous, as in this, that the youth dwelling round about were wont yeerely to exercise themselves in wrestling and other games in this place. And out of the very name a man may conjecture, that there stood there some great Temple of the Heathen Gods. What Verno∣metum signifi∣eth in the anci∣ent language of the Gaullois. For, VERNOMETUM in the ancient Gauls lan∣guage, which was the same that the old Britans tongue, soundeth as much as A great Temple ; as Venantius Fortunatus in the first booke of his Songs plainly sheweth, wri∣ting of Vernometum a Towne of Gaule in these Verses. Nomine Vernometum voluit vocitare vetustas, Quod quasi fanum ingens Gallica lingua sonat. In elder time this place they term'd by name of VERNOMET, Which sounds in language of the Gauls, as much as Temple Great. Burton Lazers. As for Burton, sirnamed Lazers, of Lazers (for so they used to terme folke infected with the Elephantiasie or Leprosie ) was a rich Spittle-house, or Hospitall, under the Master whereof, were in some sort all other small Spittles or Lazer-houses in Eng∣land, like as himselfe also was under the Master of the Lazers in Hierusalem. It was founded in the first age of the Normans, by a common contribution over all England, and the Mowbraies especially did set to their helping hands. At which time the Le∣prosie which the learned terme Elephantiasis, Leprosie in England. (because the skins of Lepres are like to that of Elephants) in grievous manner by way of contagion ranne over all England. For, it is verily thought that this disease did then first creepe out of Aegypt into this Island: which eft-once had spread it selfe into Europe: first of all in Pompeius Ma∣gnus his dayes: afterwards, under Heraclius, and at other times as we may see in the Histories, whether by celestiall influence, or other hidden causes I leave to the lear∣ned. But so farre as I could hitherto reade, it did never set foote in England before that time. Besides these places before named of great name and marke, wee must not overpasse neither Melton Mowbray neere unto this Burton, Melton. a Mercate Towne bearing name of the Mowbraies sometime Lords thereof, wherein is nothing more worth the seeing, Skeffington. than a faire Church; nor Skeffington, standing farther off, which as it hath given name to a worshipfull Family, * so againe it hath received worship and credit from the same. The River that watereth this part of the Shire, is by the Inhabitants about it cal∣led the Wreken, along which upon resemblance of the name I have sought VER∣NOMETUM, but in vaine. This Wreken gathereth a strong streame by many lively Brookes resorting unto it, Wimondham. whereof one passeth by Wimondham an ancient habitation of a younger branch of the house of the Lords Barkleis, well encreased by an heire of Dela-Laund, and so on by Melton Mowbray before mentioned, by Kirkby Bellers; (where there was a Priory) having that addition of the Bellers, a respective, rich, and noble Family in their time, Brookesby. by Brokesby a seat now of the Villiers of an old Norman race, and descended from an heire of Bellers: which Brokesby imparted formerly the sirname to the Brokesbies of especiall antiquity in these parts. Then the Wreken speed∣eth by Ratcliffe high mounted upon a cliffe and within few miles conjoyneth it selfe to Soar, neere unto Mont-Soar-hill, before mentioned. Whatsoever of this Shire lieth beyond the Wreken Northward, is not so frequent∣ly inhabited, and part of it is called the Wold, as being hilly without wood; wherein Dalby a seat of the old Family of the Noels, of whom I shall speake elsewhere, and Waltham on the Wold, a meane Mercat, are most notable. Through this part as I have beene enformed passeth the Fosse-way, made by the Romans from Lewing Bridge, by Segrave which gave sirname to the honourable Family often mentioned, and the Lodge on the Wold toward the Vale of Bever, but the Tract thereof as yet I know not. This Shire hath beene more famous from time to time by reason of the Earles thereof have beene very renowned. Earles of Leicester. And seeing it had under the Saxons government Earles by inheritance, I will first reckon them up in order, as Thomas Talbot a skilfull Antiquary hath delivered me a note of them out of the kings Records. In the time of Aethelbald King of the Mercians, and in the yeere of our Redemption 716. Leofrick was Earle of Leicester, whom there succeeded in direct line Algar the first, Algar the second, Leofrick the second, Leofstane, Leofrick the third buried in Coventry, Al∣gar the third, who had issue two sonnes, Aeadwin Earle of March, Morkar Earle of Northumberland, and a daughter named Lucy, first married to Ivon Talboys of Anjou, afterwards to Roger of Romara, who begat of her William of Romara Earle of Lin∣colne. Now when as the issue male of this Saxon Family failed, and the name of the Saxons was troden (as it were) under foot, Robert Beaumont a Norman Lord of Pont Audomar and Earle of Mellent, (after that Simon an officiary Earle of Leicester was dead) obtained his Earledome in the yeere of our Lord 1102. at the bountifull hand of King Henry the First: The words of Henry Hun∣tingdon in his Epistle De Cor temptu mundi. which Robert, A man for skill and knowledge excellent, faire spoken, subtile, wise, and witty, and by nature wily, who while hee lived in high and glo∣rious estate, an other Earle carried away his wife from him: whereupon in his old age being much troubled in minde, he fell into deepe melancholy. After him succeeded from father to sonne three Roberts, * the first sirnamed Bossu because hee was crook-backed, who after he had rebelled against King Henry the First, weary of his loose irregular life, became a Chanon Regular; the second sirnamed Blanch-maines of his lily-white-hands, who sided with the young King against King Henry the Second, and dyed in the expedition of King Richard the First to the Holy Land; the third sirnamed Fitz-Parnell, because his mother was Petronilla. Parnels daughter and one of the heires to Hugh Grant-maismill the last, in whose right hee was Seneschall or Steward of Eng∣land, and died issuelesse in the time of King John. A few yeeres after, Simon Montfort descended from a base sonne of Robert King of France, who had married the sister of Robert Fitz-Parnell, enjoyed this honour. But after that hee and his were expelled in the yeere 1200. as wholy devoted to the French, Ranulph Earle of Chester attained unto this Dignity, not in right of inheri∣tance, Matthew Paris but by his Princes favour. Howbeit, afterwards Simon Montfort sonne of the foresaid Simon obtained this honour, when Almarik his eldest brother surren∣dred up his right before King Henry the Third. This Simon, stood in so gracious fa∣vour with King Henry the Third, that hee called him home againe out of France when he was banished, heaped upon him great wealth, admitted him unto the Earle∣dome of Leicester, granted to him the Stewardship of England, and to honour him the more gave him his owne sister in marriage. But hee, thus over-heaped with honourable benefits, when he had no meanes to requite them (such is the perverse wilfulnesse of men) beganne hatefully to maligne him, See Eovesham in Worcester∣shire. yea and did most wickedly molest the good King having so well deserved, making himselfe Ringleader to the rebellious Barons, and with them raising horrible tempests of civill warre, in which himselfe also at length was overthrowne and slaine. As for his Honours and Possessions, King Henry the Third gave and graunted them to Edmund his owne younger sonne Earle of Lancaster. So afterward this ho∣nour lay as it were obscured among the Titles of the house of Lancaster: and Mawde the daughter of Henry Duke of Lancaster being married to Henry Duke of Bavaria, Earle of Henault, Holland, Zeland, &c. added unto his other Titles, this of Earle of Leicester also: For, in the Charter dated the five and thirty yeere of King Edward the Third, In the great Register of the Dutchie. hee is in plaine termes stiled William Earle of Henhault and of Lei∣cester: yea and, as we finde in the Inquisition made Anno 36. of the said King Ed∣ward the Third, shee by the name of Dutchesse of Bavaria, held the Castle, Manour, and Honour of Leicester. After whose decease without issue, that honour reverted to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster who had wedded Blanch the other sister of Mawde. From which time it became united to the House of Lancaster, untill in our remem∣brance it reflourished in L. Robert Dudley, who was by Queene Elizabeth girt with the sword of the Earledome of Leicester, and extraordinarily favoured: whereupon the States Generall of the united Provinces in their great troubles chose him trium∣phantly for their absolute Governour, and soone after as contemptuously rejected him, reserving all Soveraignty to themselves. But after a short time he passed out of this transitory life in the yeere 1588. leaving the fame onely of his greatnesse behinde him. Within this Shire are 200. Parish Churches. RVTLANDIAE Omnium in Anglia Comitatu: um minimus Pars olim CORITANORVM. RUTLAND-SHIRE. R UTLAND, in the old English Saxon tongue , is en∣vironed within Leicester-shire, unlesse it be on the South∣side, where it lieth upon the river Welland, and on the East∣side, where it butteth upon Lincoln-shire. A Country no∣thing inferiour to Leicester-shire either in fruitfull qualitie of soile, or pleasantnesse, but in quantitie onely, as being the least County of all England. For, lying in forme almost round like a circle, it is in compasse so farre about, as a light horseman will ride in one day. Whence it is, that the Inhabitants tell a tale of I wote not what king, who should give to one Rut so much land as he could ride about in one day: and that he, forsooth, rode about this shire within the time appoin∣ted, and so had it given him, and named it by his owne name Rutland. But let such fables bee packing: I would not have the trueth prejudiced with an extrava∣gant tale. And where as the earth in this shire is every where red, The na Rutland. and so red that even the sheepes fleeces are thereby coloured red: whereas also the English-Saxons called Red in their tongue Roet and Rud ; may we not suppose that this Countrey was na∣med Rutland, as one would say a Redland? For, as saith the Poet. Conveniunt rebus nomina saepè suis. The names, as often times we see, With things themselves full well agree. Now, that places in all Nations have had their names of rednesse, Rutlan Castle in Wales, built on a shore of red earth, Redbay, Redhill, Redland, The Red Promontory, The Red-Sea also betwixt Aegypt and Arabia, Erytheia in Ionia, and a number besides may proove most evidently: So that there is no cause why we should give credit to fables in this behalfe. As for this little County, it may seeme to have beene ordained a Shire or County but of late daies. For, in King Edward the Confes∣sors time, it was counted a part of Northampton-shire, and our Historiographers who wrote three hundred yeeres agoe and upward, reckoned it not in the number of Shires. Wash or Guash, a little river, which runneth from the West Eastward through the middle of it, divideth it in twaine. In the hithermore or South part riseth Uppingham upon an high ascent, Upping whence that name was imposed, not memora∣ble for any thing else, but because it is counted a well frequented Mercat towne, and hath for to shew a proper Schoole, which together with another at Okeham R. Ihonson a Minister of Gods word, in a good and laudable intent, for the training up of children in good literature lately erected, with the money he had gotten to∣gether by way of collection. Under this standeth Drystoke, which in no wise is to be passed over with silence, considering it hath been the habitation from old time of a right ancient race of the Digbyes: which (I grieve to utter it, but all men know it) hath now caught a deepe steine by Sir Everard Digby drawne into that cur∣sed crew, who most horribly complotted with one divelish flash of hellish Gun-pouder to blow up both Prince, and Country. More Eastward upon the river Welland, I saw nothing remarkeable, unlesse it be Berohdon, now Barodon, which Thomas Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke held, Fines 1 with South Leffingham, now South Luf∣fenham, and other Hamelets, Edw. 3 by service to be the Kings Chamberlaine in the Ex∣chequer. On the further part beyond the river, among the hils, there spreadeth below a ve∣ry pleasant and fruitfull vale, named at this day The vale of Catmose, happily of Coet maes, which signifieth in the Brittish tongue a field full of woods. In the middest whereof Okeham sheweth it selfe, which by the like reason may seeme to have ta∣ken the name from Okes: where, hard by the Church which is large and faire, re∣maine the crackt and decaying walls of an old Castle: which, Walkelin de Ferrari s built in the first times of the Norman Kings. And that it hath been the dwelling place of the Ferrars, besides the credit of writers, and generall report, the great horse shoes, which in times past that family gave in their armes, fastned upon the gate and in the hall, may sufficiently proove. Afterwards it belonged to the Lords of Tatteshall: But when King Richard the second had promoted Edward, the Duke of Yorkes sonne, to the Earledome of Rutland, he gave unto him this Castle also. But within our Fathers remembrance it befell unto Thomas Cromwel, Barons Crom∣well. and was repu∣ted the seat of his Baronie: See Earles of Essex. whom King Henry the Eighth advanced to the highest pitch of dignity: and streightwaies when by his plotting and attempting of many matters he had cast himselfe into the tempestuous stormes of envy and displeasure, bereft him on a sudden both of life and dignity. Burly. Over against it Eastward, there standeth Burley most daintily seated, and over∣looking the vale: A stately and sumptuous house now of the Haringtons, who by marrying the daughter and heire of Colepeper, became Lords of so faire an inheri∣tance; that ever since they have flourished in these parts, like as before time the Colepepers had done, unto whom by N. Green the wealthy and goodly Livelod of the Bruses in part had descended. As for those Bruses, being men of the chiefe No∣bility in England, they were engraffed into the Roiall stocke and family of Scot∣land: out of whom by Robert the eldest brother, the race Roiall of Scotland are sprung-like as by Bernard the younger brother, the Cottons of Connington in Hunting∣don-shire (of whom I have written already) and these Haringtons. Baron Haring∣ton. In which regard and gracious respect King James advanced Sir Iohn Harington branched from that stem that the ancient Lords Harington, to the title of Baron Harington of Exton, a towne adjacent, where he hath also an other faire house. Moreover, on the East side, by the river Guash, stands Brigcasterton, whereof I will say more afterward, and Rihall: where, when superstition had so bewitched our an∣cestours, that the multitude of their pety Saints, had well neere taken quite away the true God, one Tibba a pety Saint or Goddesse, reputed to bee the tutelar patro∣nesse, of Hauking, The Faulkoners Saint. Baron Cecill de Essendon. was of Foulers and Faulkoners worshipped as a second Diana: Essendon also is neere adjoyning; the Lord whereof Sir Robert Cecil, a good sonne of a right good father (the strength and stay of our Common-wealth in his time) was by King James created Baron Cecil of Essendon in the first yeere of his reigne. This little County King Edward the Confessor, by his last Will and Testament bequeathed unto his wife Eadith, Earles of Rut∣land. yet with this condition, that after her death it should come to S. Peter of Westminster. For, these be the very words of the said Testament. I will, that after the death of Queene Eadith my wife, ROTELAND with all the appertenances thereto, be given to my Monastery of the most blessed Saint Peter, and be yeelded up without delay for ever unto the Abbot and to the Monkes there serving God: yet King William the Conquerour cancelled and made voide this Testament, who re∣serving a great part of it to himselfe, divided the rest betweene Countesse Iudith, whose daughter was married to David King of Scots, Robert Mallet, Oger, Gislebert of Gaunt, Earle Hugh, Aubrey the Clerk, and others: And unto Westminster, first he left the Tithes, afterwards the Church onely of Okeham and parcels thereunto appertaining. This County hath not had many Earles. The first Earle of Rutland, was Ed∣ward, the first begotten Sonne of Edmund of Langley Duke of Yorke, created by King Richard the Second upon a singular favour that he cast unto him during his Fathers life, and afterwards by the same King advanced to the honour of Duke of Aumarle. This young man, wickedly projected with others a practise to make away King Henry the Fourth, and streight waies with like levity discovered the same: But after his Fathers death, being Duke of Yorke lost his life fighting couragiously amid the thickest troupes of his enemies in the battaile of Agin∣court. Long time after, there succeeded in this Honour Edward the little young Sonne of Richard Duke of Yorke, and he together with his Father, during those deadly broiles of civill warre, was slaine in the battaile fought at Wakefield. Many yeeres after, King Henry the Eighth, raised up Sir Thomas Mannours, to be Earle of Rutland, who in right of his Grand-mother Aeleonor was possessed of a goodly and faire inheritance of the Barons Roos, lying in the countries round a∣bout, and elsewhere. In his roome succeeded his Sonne Henry, and after him like∣wise Edward his Sonne, unto whom if I should say nothing else, that commenda∣tion of the Poet was most aptly and truly appliable. —Nomen virtutibus aequat, Nec sinit ingenium nobilitate premi. His name so great with vertues good, he matcheth equally, Nor suffreth wit smuthring to lie under Nobility. But he, by over hasty and untimely death, being received into Heaven, left this dignity unto John his Brother: who also departing this life within a while, hath for his successor, Roger his Sonne, answerable in all points to his ancient and right no∣ble parentage. This small Shire hath Parish Churches 48. LINCOLNIAE Comitatus vbi olim insederunt CORITANI LINCOLNE-SHIRE. V Pon Rutland on the East side, confineth the County of LIN∣COLNE, called by the English-Saxons , and by the Normans Nicol-shire after their comming into the Land, with some transposition of letters, but usually LINCOLNE-SHIRE. A very large Country, as reaching almost threescore miles in length, and carrying in some places above thirty miles in bredth: passing kinde for yeeld of Corne, and feeding of Cattaile, well furnished and set out with a great number of Townes, and watered with many Rivers. Upon the Eastside, where it bendeth out∣ward with a brow fetching a great compasse, the German Ocean beateth on the shore: Northward it recheth to Humber an arme of the sea: on the West side it butteth upon Nottingham-shire: and on the South it is severed from Northampton-shire by the River Welland. This whole Shire is divided into three parts, whereof one is called Holland: a second Kesteven, and the third Lindsey. Holland, which In∣gulph termeth Holland lyeth to the sea, and like unto that Holland in Germanie, it is so throughly wet in most places with waters, that a mans foote is ready to sinke into it, and as one standeth upon it, the ground will shake and quake under his feet: and thence it may seeme to have taken the name: unlesse a man would with Ingulph say that Holland is the right name, and the same imposed upon it, of Hay which our Progenitours broadly called Hoy. This part throughout beareth upon that ebbing and flowing arme of the Sea, which Ptolomee calleth METARIS, Metaris aestu ∣rium. The Washes. instead of Maltraith, and wee at this day, The Washes. A very large arme this is and passing well knowne, at every tide and high sea covered all over with water, but when the sea ebbeth, and the tide is past, a man may passe over it as on dry land, but yet not without danger. Which, King John learned with his losse. For, whilest he journied this way, when he warred upon the rebelli∣ous Barons, the waters suddenly brake in upon him, so that at Fosse-dyke, and Welstream he lost all his carriage and princely furniture, as Matthew of Westminster writeth. This Country which the Ocean hath laied to the land, as the Inhabitants beleeve, by sands heaped and cast together, they it terme Silt, is assailed on the one side with the said Ocean sea, and in the other with a mighty confluence of waters from out of the higher countries, in such sort that all the Winter quarter the people of the coun∣try are faine to keepe watch and ward continually, and hardly with all the bankes and dammes that they make against the waters, are able to defend themselves from the great violence and outrage thereof. The ground bringeth forth but small store of corne, but plenty of grasse, and is replenished abundantly with fish and water-fowle. The Soile throughout is so soft, that they use their Horses unshod: neither shall you meet so much as with a little stone there, that hath not beene brought thither from other places: neverthelesse, there bee most beautifull Churches standing there built of foure square stone. Certaine it is, that the sea aforetime had entred farther up into the Country, and that appeareth by those bankes formerly raised against the waterwaves then in-rush∣ing, which are now two miles off from the shore, as also by the hils neere Sutterton, which they call Salt-Hils. Salt-hils. But, of fresh water there is exceeding great want in all places: neither have they any at all but raine water and that in pits, which if they be of any great depth, presently become brackish, if shallow, they dry up as soone. Neither are there Quicksands wanting, Quicksands. which have a wonderfull force to draw to them and to hold fast, as both Shepheards and their poore Sheepe also finde other whiles not without danger. This Holland or Hoiland (whether you will) is divided into two parts. The Lower and the Higher: The Lower hath in it soule and slabby quavemires, yea and most troublesome Fennes, which the very Inhabitants themselves for all their stilts cannot stalke through. And considering that it lieth very low and flat, fenced it is of the one side against the Ocean, on the other from those waters which overwhelme the upper part of the Isle of Ely, with mighty piles and huge bankes opposed against the same. Of which, Southybanke is of greatest name; which least it should have a breach made through it with that infinite masse of water that falleth from the South part, when the Rivers swell, and all is overflowne by inundation, the people watch with great care and much feare, as against a dangerous enemy. And yet for the draining away of this water, the neighbour Inhabitants at the common charges of the coun∣try beganne to make a new chanell at Clowcrosse in the yeere 1599. Neere unto this banke aforesaid, Crowland. we saw Crowland, which also is called Croyland, a Towne of good note among the Fenne-people, the name whereof soundeth, as Ingulph the Abbat of this place interpreteth it, as much as A raw and muddy Land: A place, as they write, much haunted in times past with I wot not what sprites and fearefull apparitions, before that Guthlake a right holy and devout man led there an Eremits life. In whose memoriall Aethelbald King of the Mercians founded to the honour of God at his great charges, in the yeere of our Salvation 716. an Abbay very famous both for opinion of the religious life of the Monkes, and also for their wealth. Concerning which, take heere, if you please, these Verses of Foelix a Monke of good antiquity, out of the life of Guthlake. Nunc exercet ibi se munificentia Regis, Et magnum templum magno molimine condit. At cum tam mollis, tam lubrica, tam malè constans Fundamenta palus non ferret saxea, palos Praecipit infigi quercino robore caesos, Leucarúmque novem spacio rate fertur arena; Inque solum mutatur humus, suffultáque tali Cella basi, multo stat consummata labore. His bounty now the King doth there bestow, An Abbay faire with much expense to reare. But seeing that the waterish Fenne below, Those ground-workes laid with stone uneath could beare, (So quaving soft and moist the Bases were) He caused piles made of good heart of oke, Pitch't downe to be with maine commanders stroke. Then nine leagues off, men sand in Barges brought, Which once fast ramm'd by painfull workmans hand, Of rotten earth good solid ground was wrought; On which for aye such workes might firmely stand; And thus by this devise of new plantation, The Church stands firme and hath a sure foundation. The Divels of Crowland. If I should exemplifie unto you out of that Monke, the Devils of Crowland, with their blabber lips, fire-spitting mouthes, rough and skaly visages, beetle heads, terri∣ble teeth, sharpe chins, hoarse throats, blacke skinnes, crump-shoulders, side and gor-bellies, burning loines, crooked and hawm'd legges, long tailed buttockes, and ugly mishapes, which heeretofore walked and wandered up and downe in these pla∣ces, and very much troubled holy Guthlake and the Monkes, you would laugh full merily: and I might bee thought a simple sily-one full worthily. Howbeit, in re∣gard of the admirable situation of this place, so farre different from all others in England, and considering the Abbay was so famous, I am well content to dwell a while in the description of these particulars. Amid most deepe Fennes and standing wa∣ters in a muddy and miry ground this Crowland lyeth so shut up and divided round about from all entrance, that there is no accesse to it, unlesse it bee on the North and East side, and that by narrow Cawsies. Seated it is for all the world, if I may re∣semble great and small things together, like unto Venice. Three streets it hath and those severed one from another by water courses betweene, planted thicke with willowes, and raised upon piles or postes pitched and driven downe deepe into the standing waters, having over them a triangle Bridge of admirable workmanship, under which for to receive the fall of the waters meeting in one confluence, the In∣habitants report there was a pit sunke of a mighty depth. Now, whereas beyond the Bridge in solum mutatur humus (as that Monke said) that is, The mould is chaunged, and is become firme and solid ground, there stood in times past that famous Abbay, and the same verily taking up but a small plot of ground: about which, all (save where the Towne standeth) is so rotten and moorish, that a man may thrust a pole downe right thirty foote deepe: and round about it every way is nothing but a plot of reeds; and next unto the Church a place planted with Alders. Howbeit, the Towne is well enough peopled with Inhabitants, who have their Cattaile a great way from the Towne, and when they are to milke them, they goe in little punts or boats that will carry but two a peece, (which they call Skerries: ) yet the most gain∣full trade they have is by taking fish, and catching of water-foule; and that is so great, that in the moneth of August, they will spread a net and at once draw three thousand Mallards and wilde Duckes and such like together: and these pooles or watery plots of theirs, they use to terme their Corne fields: for, they see no Corne growing in five miles any way. In regard of this their taking of fish and fowle they paid yeerely in times past to the Abbat, as now they doe to the King, three hundred pounds of our money. The private History of this Abbay I list not to relate (seeing it is commonly ex∣tant and to be seene) out of Ingulph now printed and published: yet my minde serves me well, briefely to record, that which Peter of Bloys Vice-chancellour to King Henry the Second reported at large, as touching the new building of this Abbay in the yeere of our Redemption 1112. to the end, that by this one president wee may learne, by what meanes and helpes, so mighty, so huge, and so faire religious houses were raised and built up in those times. Ioffrid the Abbat obtained of the Archbishops and Bishops in England, An Indulgence for the third part of penance enjoyned for sinnes committed, unto every one that helped forward so holy a worke. With this Indulgence he sent out Monkes every way and all about to gather money: wherewith when hee was now sufficiently furnished, to the end that hee might have an happy beginning of this worke from some happy names of lucky presage, hee solemnely appointed the day of Saint Perpetua, and of Saint Felicity, on which he would lay the first foun∣dation. At which day there came flocking in great numbers, the Nobles, the Pre∣lates, and Commons of all the Country thereabout. After the celebration of Di∣vine Service, and Anthems sung in parts, Abbat Ioffrid himselfe layed the first Corner stone Eastward; then the Noble men and great persons every one in their degree couched their stones, and upon the said stones some laid money, others their sealed Deeds of lands, Advousons of Churches, of Tenths of their Sheepe, and of the Tithes of their Churches, of certaine measures of wheat, and of a certaine number of Workemen, as Masons and Quarriers, whom they would pay. The common sort again and towneships for their parts, offered with chearefull devotion, some money, others one daies labour every moneth untill the worke were finished, some the buil∣ding of whole Pillars, others of the bases to the said Pillars, and others again to make certaine parts of the wals, striving a vie who should doe most. This done, the Ab∣bat after hee had in a solemne speech commended their devout bounty to so holy a worke, granted unto every one of them the fraternity of his Abbay, and the partici∣pation besides of all spirituall benefits in that Church: as praiers, blessings, &c. and so when he had entertained them with a very sumptuous feast, hee gave them his bles∣sing and dismissed them chearefully every man to his owne home. But I will dwell no longer in this matter. But hereby you may see how by small contributions great workes arose. From Crowland there goeth a Cawsey planted on both sides with Wil∣lowes, betweene the River Welland and the deepe Marishes, Northward: upon which, two miles from Crowland, I saw the fragment of a Piramis with this Inscription. . I SAY, THAT SAINT GUTH∣LAKE, THIS STONE HIS BOVND DOTH MAKE. Spalding. Higher yet upon the same River is seated Spalding, enclosed round about with Ri∣verets and draines, a fairer Towne I assure you than a man would looke to finde in this Tract among such slabbes and water-plashes: where Ivo Talbois, whom Ingulph elsewhere calleth Earle of Anjou, gave an ancient Cell to the Monkes of Angiers in France. From hence as farre as to Deeping, which is ten miles off, Egelrick Abbat of Crowland, afterwards Bishop of Durham, made for the ease of travailers, as saith Ingulphus, through the middest of a vast Forest, and of most deepe Fennes, a sound causey of wood and sand, after his owne name called Elrich-road ; which notwithstanding at this day is not to be seene. In higher Hoiland that bendeth more into the North, first we have in sight Kirk∣ton, so named of the Church, which is passing faire; and then, where the River Wit∣ham hemnd in strongly with bankes on both sides runneth in a maine and full streame toward the sea, Boston. flourisheth Boston, more truely named Botolphs-towne. For, it carri∣ed that name from one Botolph a most holy and devout Saxon, who at Icanhoe, had a Monastery. A famous Towne this is, standing on both sides of the River Witham, which hath over it a wooden bridge of a great height; and well frequented by the meanes of a commodious haven unto it: the Mercat place is faire and large, and the Church maketh a goodly shew, as well for the beautifull building as the greatnesse thereof: the towre-steeple of it, which riseth up to a mighty height, doth, as one would say, salute passengers and travailers a great way off, and giveth direction also to the sailers. A lamentable overthrow it sustained in the Raigne of Edward the first. For, when bad and Ruffian-like behaviour rufled at that time over all England, cer∣taine military lusty fellowes having proclaimed heere a Justs or running at Tilt, at a Faire time, when there was much resort of people thither, came apparelled in the habit of Monkes and Chanons, Robbers in Monkes habits. set fire on the Towne in most places thereof, brake in upon Merchants with sodaine violence, tooke away many things by force, burnt a great deale more; in so much as our Historians write, that (as the ancient Writers re∣cord of Corinth when it was destroied) molten gold and silver ran downe in a streame together. The Ring-leader Robert Chamberlan, after hee had confessed the act, and what a shamefull deed had been committed, was hanged: yet could he not be wrought by any meanes to disclose his complices in this foule fault. But happier times raised Boston againe out of the ashes, and a staple for wooll here setled, did very much enrich it, Stilyard. and drew thither merchants of the Hanse Society, who had here their Guild. At this day it is for building faire, and by good trade rich. For, the Inhabitants give them∣selves both to merchandise and also to grasing. The Register of Freston. Barons of Burton Croeun. De vallibus. Nere unto this was the Barony de Cro∣eun or de Credonio, out of which family, Alan de Croeun founded the Priory of Freston ; and at length Parnel heire of the family being twice married transferred no small in∣heritance, first to the Longchamps, which came to the Pedwardins ; and secondly to John Vaulx, from whom the Barons Roos are descended. Beyond it scarce six miles, reach∣eth Holland: all which Ivo Talboys of Anjo received at the bountifull hands of king William the Conqueror, Herwardus Anglus. but Herward an English man, of good hope and full of douty courage, being sonne to Leofrick Lord of Brane or Burne not brooking his insolency, when he saw his owne and his Country mens safety now endangered; after he had received the cincture with a military Belt by Brann Abbat of Peterborough, Ingulph of Crowland. whose stomacke rose also against the Normans, raised warre against him, oftentimes put him to flight, and at length carried him away captive, and suffered him not to bee ransomed but with such conditions that he might be received into the Kings favour, wherein he dyed his liege man. For so deserved his valour, which is alwayes com∣mended even in a very enemy. His Daughter being wedded to Hugh Enermeve Lord of Deping enjoyed his lands, which afterwards, as I understand, was devolved upon the Family of Wake, Barons de Wake. which being mightily enriched with the Possessions of the Estotevills, was of right great honour in these parts, untill the Raigne of Edward the Second: for then, by an heire Generall, their inheritance came by right of marriage unto Edmund of Woodstocke youngest sonne to King Edward the First, and Earle of Kent. But of a younger sonne, the ancient Family of the Wakes of Blisworth in Northampton-shire yet remaining is descended. The second part of this Country commonly called Kesteven, Kesteven. and by Aethelward an ancient Authour, Ceostefnewood, adjoyning to Hoiland on the West side; is for aire farre more wholesome, and for Soile no lesse fruitfull. Greater this is and larger than the other, yea and garnished every where with more faire Townes. At the entry thereinto upon the river Welland standeth Stanford, Stanford. in the Saxon tongue , built of rough stone, whence it hath the name. A Towne well peopled and of great resort, endowed also with sundry immunities, and walled about; It gave Geld or Tribute, as wee reade in Domesday Booke, for twelve hundreds and an halfe, in the army, shipping, and Danegeld, and in it were sixe Wards. What time as King Edward the elder fortified the South bankes of Rivers against the Danes breaking by force into the Land out of the North parts, Marianus recordeth, that hee built a very strong Castle just over against this Towne also on the South banke (which now is called Stanford Baron ) yet there appeareth not any one token thereof at this day: for, See Burghley in the County of Northamp∣ton. that Castle which in time of the civill Warre Stephen strengthened against Henry of Anjou, was within the Towne, as both the generall report holdeth, and the very plot also whereon it stood as yet remaining, sheweth. But soone after, the said Henry, being now King of England, gave the whole Towne of Stanford, which was in his Demaine, excepting the fees or Feifs of the Barons and Knights of the same Towne, unto Richard de Humez or Homets, who was Constable to the King, his Soveraigne Lord, for his homage and service. And the same afterwards, held William Earle of Warren by the will and pleasure of King John. Under the Raigne of Edward the Third, An Academy or University be∣gun at Stan∣ford. an University, and publique profession of good learning beganne heere, which the Inhabitants count no small credit unto them. For, when there was such hote debate and contention betweene the Northren and Southren Students at Oxford, a great number of Scholers withdrew themselves hither: but after a small while they returned upon the Kings Proclamation, to Ox∣ford, and as they sodainely beganne, so they ended as soone this new University: And thenceforward provided it was by oth, That no Student in Oxford should pub∣liquely professe or reade at Stanford to the prejudice of Oxford. Neverthelesse it flouri∣shed with fresh trading and merchandise, untill the civill warre, betweene the two houses of Lancaster and Yorke, grew so hore, that the Northren Souldiers breaking into the Towne destroyed all with fire and sword. Neither could it ever since that time fully recover the ancient Dignity. And yet now it is in good estate: and the civill government thereof consisteth of an Alderman and foure and twenty Burgesses his brethren. Beautified it is with seven Parish Churches or thereabout, and sheweth an old Hospitall and that a very faire house founded by William Browne a Burgesse there, besides another new one on this side the Bridge lately built by that Nestor of Britaine, Sir William Cecill Baron Burghley, what time as hee raised that stately and sumptuous house at Burghley, whereof I have spoken already in Northampton-shire, who lieth enterred here in a goodly and gorgeous Tombe within the Parish Church of Saint George ; a man (to say nothing else of him) who by course of nature, and for his owne glory lived long enough, but in regard of his Country died oversoone. Although some tokens remaining of antiquity, and the Commonly called High-Dike. High-street, made by the Romans, which so soone as you are without the Towne leadeth you the direct way into the North, may sufficiently shew, that sometimes there was a Ferry or Waterfare heere. Gausennae. Yet that this Towne should be that GAUSENNAE, which Antonine the Emperour placeth not farre from hence, the said tokens of Antiquity doe not affoord sufficient proofe. But seeing that a mile from hence there is a little Village called Bridge-casterton (which very name carryeth with it the marke of Antiquity) where the River Guash or Wash crosseth the said High-street ; Bridge-Caster∣ton. the affinity of this name Guash with Gausenna, and the distance also making not against it, hath made mee to thinke that Gausennae was it which now is called Bridge-casterton, untill time bring truth to light. If I should thinke, that Stanford grew out of the ruines of this Towne, and that this part of the Shire was named Kesteven of GAUSENNAE, like as ano∣ther part, Lindsey, of the City Lindum, let this I pray you, bee but mine opinion, and judge yee thereof accordingly. It is supposed that this Gausennae was over∣throwne, when (as Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon writeth) the Picts and Scots had spoiled all the Country, as farre as to Stanford: where Hengist and his English-Sa∣xons with their unwearied force and singular prowesse hindered the passage of those furious Nations, so that after many of them were slaine, and more taken prisoners, the rest betooke themselves to flight. But let us proceed to the rest. On the East side of Kesteven which bendeth toward Hoiland, as wee goe North∣ward, these places stand in order: Deping. First, Deping, that is to say, (as Ingulph inter∣preteth it), Deepe Medow: Where, Richard de Rulos, Chamberlaine to William Conquerour, excluding the River Welland with raising up an high banke (for that it often overflowed) and building upon the said Banke many Tenements, made a great Vil∣lage. This Deping, Deping fen. or Deepe Medow, was very fitly so called, for, the plaine lying under it, and which taketh up in compasse many miles, is of all this fenny Country the deepest, and the very receptacle of most waters. And that which a man would mervaile at, it lyeth farre under the Chanell of the River Clen, which being held in with forced bankes, Burne. passeth by from out of the West. Then have you Burne, well knowne by occasion that King Edmund was crowned and the Wakes had a Castle there, who obtained unto this Towne, from King Edward the First, the liberty of a Mercate. Lutterell. Sempringham. More Eastward is Irnham, a seat of the Barony in times past of Sir Andrew Lutterell. Beyond it is Sempringham, famous in these daies by reason of that passing faire house, which Edward Lord Clinton, afterwards Earle of Lincolne built; but renowned in old time for the religious Order of the Gilbertines, instituted by Gilbert Lord of the place: for he, a wonderfull man, & in custodia mulierum gratiae singularis, that is, of singular grace in taking charge of women, in the yeere after Christs Nativity 1148. contrary to Justi∣nians Constitutions, which forbad Double Monasteries, that is to say, of men and wo∣men together; howbeit, well backed with the authority of Eugenius the third, Bi∣shop of Rome, ordained a Sect consisting of men and women; which so grew and encreased, that himselfe laied the foundations of thirteene religious houses of this Order, Gilbertine Freers and Sisters. and whiles hee lived had in them 700. Gilbertine Brethren, and eleven hun∣dred Sisters ; but no honester than they should be, if wee may beleeve Niele, a scof∣fing Poet in those daies, who wrote thus of them: Harum sunt quadam steriles, quaedam parientes, Virgineóque tamen nomine cuncta tegunt. Qua pastoralis baculi dotatur honore, Illa quidem meliùs, fertiliúsque parit. Vix etiam quaevis sterilis reperitur in illis, Donec eis aetas talia posse negat. Some barren are of these, some fruitfull be, Yet they by name of Virgins cover all: More fertile sure and better beareth she, Who blest is once with croysier pastorall: Now, scarce of them is found one barren Doe, Till age debarre, whether they will or no. Then see you Folkingham, Lords of Fol∣kingham. which also is now a Lordship of the Clintons, the Baro∣ny in times past of the Gaunts, who were descended from Gilbert de Gaunt, nephew to Baldwin Earle of Flaunders, unto whom by the liberality of King William the Con∣querour there fell great revenewes. For, thus we reade in an old manuscript: Me∣morandum, that with William Conquerour there came in one Gilbert de Gaunt, unto whom the said William gave the Manour of Folkingham, with all the Appertenances and the Honour thereunto belonging: and they expelled a certaine woman named Dunmoch. Of the said Gilbert came one Walter de Gaunt his sonne and heire, and of the said Walter came Gilbert de Gaunt his sonne and heire, also Robert de Gaunt a younger sonne. And from the said Gilbert the sonne and heire, came Alice his daughter and heire, who was espoused to Earle Simon, and shee gave many Tenements to religious men, and dyed without heire of her owne body. Then descended the inheritance to Robert de Gaunt aforesaid her unckle: and of the foresaid Robert came Gilbert his sonne and heire, and of the aforesaid, came another Gilbert his sonne and heire, and of the aforesaid, came another Gilbert his sonne and heire, who gave the Manour of Folkingham with the Appertenances to Edward the sonne of Henry King of England. Pl. 27. H. 3. Rot. 13. Linc. This Gilbert as wee finde in the Plees, out of which this Pedegree is prooved, claimed service against Wil. de Scremby. And at length it came by gift of the Prince to Sir Henry Beaumont: For, most certaine it is, that he held it in the Raigne of Edward the Second. Inqui. 4.8.2. Screkingham. Neere unto this, is Screkingham, remarkable for the death of Alfrick the second, Earle of Leicester, whom Hubba a Dane slew. Of which place, it seemeth that In∣gulph spake, writing thus: In Kesteven were slaine three great Lords or petty Kings of the Danes, whom they buryed in a Village which was called before, Laundon, but now for the Sepulture of three Kings, Tre-King-ham. And more into the East, is Hather, in this regard onely to be mentioned, Bussy. Sleford. that the Busseis or Busleis heere dwell, who deduce their Race from Roger de Busly in the Conquerours time. Then Sleford, a Castle of the Bi∣shops of Lincolne, Baron Hussy. built by Alexander the Bishop: where Sir John Hussy the first and last Baron of that name created by King Henry the Eighth, built himselfe an house: who having unwittingly and unadvisedly in the yeere 1537. engaged himselfe with the common people in a tumultuous commotion, what time as the first dissention brake out in England about Religion, lost his head. Not many miles from hence stan∣deth Kime, Kime. which gave name to a noble family called De Kime: but the possession of the place came at length to the Umfranvils: of whom three were called to the Par∣liament by the name of the Earles of Anguse in Scotland. But the first of them, the lear∣ned in our common lawes would not acknowledge to be Earle, (for that Anguse was not within the limits of the Realme of England) untill hee produced openly in Court the Kings Writ, by vertue whereof he had been summoned by the King to the Parli∣ament, under the Title of Earle of Anguse. From the Umfravils this came unto the family of Talbois, Earles of Anguse. of whom Gilbert was created by King Henry the Eighth Baron Talbois, whose two sonnes dying without issue, the inheritance was by the females transferred to the Dimocks, Temple Bruer. Inglebeies, and others. More Westward wee saw Temple Bruer, that is, as I interprete it, Temple in the Heath. For it seemeth to have beene a Commaundery of the Templers: considering that the decayed broken Walles of the Church there are seene in forme of the New Temple at London. Hard to it lyeth Blankenay, Barons D'incourt. the Barony in times past of the D'incourts, who flourished successively a long time one after another from the Normans comming in unto King Henry the Sixth his time: For then, their male line determined in one William, who had two sisters for his heires, the one married to Sir William Lovell, the other to Sir Ralph Cromwell. Inquis. 21. H. 6. The more willingly have I made mention of this Family, to give satisfaction in some measure unto the longing desire of Edmond Baron D'eincourt, who long since being carefull and earnest about the preservation of the memory of his name, as having no male Issue, put up an humble Petition to King Edward the Second, Patent. 10▪ Edw. 2. Whereas hee foresaw that his sirname and Armes after his death would bee quite forgotten, and yet heartily desired that after his decease they might bee still remembred, that hee might bee permitted to enfeoffe whomsoever it pleased him, both in his Manours and Armes also. Which request hee obtained, and it was graunted under the Kings Let∣ters Patents: yet for all that is this sirname now quite gone (to my knowledge) and had it not beene continued by the light of learning, might have beene cleane forgotten for ever. In the West part of Kesteven and the very confines of this Shire and Leicester∣shire, standeth Belvoir, Belvoir or Bever Castle. or Beauvoir Castle, so called of the faire prospect (what name soever it had in old time) mounted upon the top of a good steepe hill, built by Robert De Todeneie a Norman Nobleman, Tony. who also beganne the little Mona∣stery adjoyning, from whom by the Albeneies out of little Britaine, and the Ba∣rons Roos, it came by inheritance to the Mannors Earles of Rutland: of whom the first, that is to say, Thomas, as I have beene enformed, raised it up againe with newbuildings from the ground, when as it had for many yeeres lien buryed as it were in his owne ruines. For, in despite of Thomas Lord Roos, who tooke part with King Henry the Sixth, it was much defaced by William Lord Hastings, unto whom (after that the said Baron Roos was attainted) King Edward the Fourth had graunted it with very faire Lands. But Edmond Baron Roos sonne of the said Thomas, by the gracious favour of king Henry the seventh recovered this ancient Inheritance againe. Stones Astroites. About this Castle are found the Stones called Astroites, which resemble little Starres joyned one with another, wherein are to bee seene at every corner five Beames or Rayes, and in every Ray in the middest is small hollownesse. This Stone among the Germanes got his name of Victorie, for that, as George Agri∣cola writeth in his Sixth Booke of Mineralls, they are of opinion, that whoso∣ever carryeth it about him shall winne his suite and get victory of his enemies. But whether this Stone of ours, as that in Germany, being put in vineger, will stirre out of his place, and turne it selfe some-what round, I could never yet make tryall. Under this Castle lyeth a Vale and presenteth a most pleasant pro∣spect thereunto, The vale of Beaver. whereupon it is commonly called, the Vale of Belver, which is very large and passing pleasantly beautified with Corne fields, and no lesse rich in pastures; lying stretched out in three Shires, of Leicester, Nottingham and Lincolne. If not in this very place, yet hard by it, in all probability, stood that MARGI∣DUNUM, Margidunum. which Antonine the Emperour placeth next after VERNOMETUM, as both the name and the distance also from VERNOMETUM and the Towne PONT or Paunton, betweene which Antonine placeth it, may most plainly shew. It should seeme that ancient name Margidunum was borowed from Marga and the situation of it: Marga. i. Marle Dunum. For, Marga among the Britans is a kinde of earth named Marle wherewith they nourished and kept their grounds in heart: and DUNUM, which signifieth an Hill, agreeth onely to places higher mounted than others. And yet in this Etymology of the name I am in a doubt, seeing that Marle in this place is very geason or skant (happily because no man seeketh for it) unlesse the Britans by the name of Marga tearmed Plaister-stone, which is digged uppe hard by, as I have learned: the use whereof in white pargetting and in making of Images, was of especiall request among the Romans, as Plinie witnesseth in his Naturall History. River Wi∣tham. Witham a River plentifull in Pikes but carrying a small streame, watereth this part of the Shire and on the North-side encloseth it. It hath his beginning by a little towne of the same name, Bitham. not farre from the ruines of Bitham Castle, which, as we find in an old Pedigree King William the first gave to Stephen Earle of Albemarle and Holdernesse, that he might from thence have wherewith to feed his sonne, as yet a little infant, with fine wheat bread (considering that in Holdernesse they did eate in those daies oten bread onely, although they use now such kind of bread little or nothing at all. Matthew Paris. ) But in the reigne of King Henry the Third, when William de Fortibus Earle of Aumarle rebelliously kept this Castle, and thence forraged and wasted the country about it, it was laid well neere even with the ground. Afterward, this was the capitall seat, Colvill. as it were, of the Barony of the Colvils, who along time flourished in very great honour: but the right line had an end under King Edward the Third: and then the Gernons and those notable Bassets of Sapcot, in right of their wives entred upon the inheritance. This river Witham presently beneath his head hath a towne seated hard by it na∣med Paunton, Paunton. which standeth much upon the antiquity thereof, where are digged up oftentimes pavements of the Romanes wrought with checker worke: and heere had the river a bridge over it in old time: Ad Pontes. For, that this is the towne AD PONTEM, which Antonine the Emperor placed seven miles distant from MARGIDUNUM, the name Paunton, together with the distance not onely from Margidunum but also from Crococalana doth easily convince: Crococalana for in Antonine, that towne was called CROCO∣CALANA, which at this day is named Ancaster, Ancaster. and is no more but a long streete, through which the High-way passeth: whereof the one part not long since belonged to the Veseies, the other to the Cromwells. At the entry into it on the South part, we saw a rampier with a ditch, and certaine it is, that aforetime it had been a Castle: like as on the other side Westward, is to be seene a certaine summer standing campe of the Romanes. And it may seeme that it tooke a British name from the situation thereof. For it lieth under an hill: and Cruc-maur in British signifieth a Great hill, like as Cruc-occhidient, a mount in the West, as we read in Giraldus Cambrensis, and Ninnius: But what should be the meaning of that Calana, let others looke. The memory of an∣tiquity in this towne is continued and maintained by the Romane Coines, by the vaults under ground oftentimes discovered, by the site upon the High-street, and by those fourteene miles that are betweene it and Lincolne through a greene plaine, which we call Ancaster-Heath ; for, just so many doth Antonine reckon betweene Croco-calana and Lindum. But now returne we to the river. After Paunton, Grantham. wee come to Grantham, a towne of good resort, adorned and set out with a Schoole built by Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, and with a faire Church, having a spire-steeple of a mighty heigth, whereof there goe many fabu∣lous tales. Beneath it, neere unto Herlaxton a little village, a brasen vessell in our fathers time was turned up with a plough, A golden met. wherein a golden Helmet of a most antique fashion was found, set with precious stones: which was given as a present to Catherine of Spaine, wife and Dowager to King Henry the Eighth. From hence Witham passeth with a long course North-ward not farre from Somerton Castle: Somerton. which Antonine Becc, Durham booke. Bishop of Durham built, and gave to King Edward the First: but a little after it was bestowed upon Sir Henry de Beaumont, who about that time came into Eng∣land and began the family of the Lords Beaumont: Lords of mont. which in the foregoing age in some sort failed, when as the sister and heire of the last Vicount was married to John Lord Lovel de Tichmersh. But of this house I have spoken before in Leicester-shire. From thence, the river bending by little and little to the South-East, and passing through a Fenny Country, dischargeth it selfe into the German Sea beneath Boston, after it hath closed in Kesteven on the North. On the other side of Witham, Lindsey▪ lieth the third part of this shire, named Lindsey, which, of the chiefe Citie of the Shire Bede called Lindissi: and being greater than Hoiland and Kesteven, butteth with a huge bowing front upon the Ocean, beating upon the East and North sides thereof. On the West part it hath the river Trent, and is seve∣red from Kesteven ; on the South by that Witham aforesaid, and the Fosse Dike ancient∣ly cast and scoured by King Henry the First for seven miles in length from Witham into Trent, Fosse dike. Hoveden. that it might serve the Citizens of Lincolne for carriage of necessaries by water. Torksey. Where this Dike entreth into Trent, standeth Torksey, in the Saxon language , a little towne, and in these daies of small account, but in ancient times very famous. Domesday booke. For, before the Normans comming in, as we finde in that booke where∣in King William the first set downe his survey of England, there were numbered in it two hundred Burgesses, who enjoyed many priviledges, on this condition, that they should transport the Kings Embassadours whensoever they came this way in their owne Barges along the Trent, and conduct them as farre as YORKE. But where this Dike joyneth to Witham, there is the principall City of this Shire placed: which Ptolomee and Antonine the Emperour called LINDUM, the Britans LIND∣COIT, Lindum▪ Lincolne-Collis an hill. of the woods (for which we finde it elsewhere written amisse Luit-coit ) Bede, LINDE-COLLINUM, and LINDE COLLINA CIVITAS, whether it were of the situation upon an hill, or because it hath been a Colonie, I am not able to avouch. The Saxons termed it , and , the Normans most corruptly Nichol, we Lincolne, and the Latine writers Lincolnia: whereupon Alexander Necham in his booke intituled, Divine wisdome, writeth thus, Lindisiae columen Lincolnia, sive columna, Munificâ foelix gente, repleta bonis. Lincolne the stay or piller sure of Lindsey thou maist bee, Blest for thy people bounteous, and goods that are in thee. Others will have it to take that name of the river Witham, which they say was called by a more ancient name Lindis, but they have no authority to warrant them. Neither am I of their judgement: For, Necham is against it, who foure hundred yeeres agoe called the said river, Witham in this verse. Trenta tibi pisces mittit Lincolnia, sed te, Nec dedigneris, Withama parvus adit. The Trent unto thee sendeth fish, O Lincoln, well we see; Yet little Witham, scorne it not, a riveret comes to thee. I for my part would rather derive it from the British word Lhin, which with the Britans signifieth a Lake. For, I have been enformed of the Citizens, that Witham be∣low the Citie, by Swanpole was broader than now it is, and yet is it at this day of a good breadth: and to say nothing of Lindaw in Germanie, by the Lake Acronius, and of Linternum in Italie standing by a Lake ; I see that in our Britaine, Tallhin, Glan-lhin, and Lhinlithquo, are townes by lakes sides. This Citie it selfe being large, well in∣habited and frequented, standeth upon the side of an hill, where Witham bendeth his course Eastward, and being divided with three small chanels, watereth the lower part of the Citie. That the ancient LINDUM of the Britans stood on the very top of the hill, which had a very hard ascent up to it, and reached out beyond the gate called Newport, the expresse tokens of a rampier and deepe ditches which are yet ve∣ry evident, doe plainely shew. In this City, Vortimer that warlike Britan, who many a time discomfited the Saxons and put them to flight, ended his daies, and was heere contrary to his owne comman∣dement, buried. For, he was in a full and assured hope perswaded, that if he were en∣terred in the sea shore, his very ghost was able to protect the Britans from the Saxons, as writeth Ninius, the disciple of Elvodugus. But the English Saxons after they had rased this old Lindum, first possessed themselves of the South side of the hill, at the foot whereof they built, as it seemeth, the gate yet standing compiled of vast stones; and with the ruines of that more ancient Towne fortified it. Afterwards they went downe lower to the river side, built in a place that was called Wickanford, and walled it about on that side which is not fensed by the River: At which time, as saith Bede, Paulinus preached the Word of God unto the Province of Lindsey, and first of all converted unto the Lord, the Governour or Provost of Lincolne City, whose name was Blecca, with his family. In which very City, hee built also a Church of goodly stone worke, the roofe whereof being either fallen for want of repaire, or cast downe by the violent hand of enemies, the walles are seene standing to this day. After this the Danes wonne it by assault once or twice: First, those troupes of spoiling mates, out of whose hands King Edmund Iron∣side wrested it by force: then Canutus from whom Aetheldred regained it, when up∣on his returne out of Normandy, he valiantly forced Canutus to abandon the towne, and beyond all hope recovered England which before was lost. In the Raigne of Edward the Confessour, there were in it, as Domesday booke recordeth, a thousand and seventy Mansions, with lodgings to give entertainment, and twelve Lage men having Sac, and Soc. But in the Normans time, as saith William of Malmesbury, It was one of the best peopled Cities of England, and a place of traffique and merchandise, for all commers by sea and land: and as the same Domesday booke saith, there were at that time counted and taxed in this City 900. Burgesses: and many Mansions were laied waste, 166. for the Castle, and other 74. without the precinct of the Castle, not through the oppression of the Sheriffe and his Ministers, but by reason of mishap, poverty, and casualty by fire. The said King William the Conqueror for the strengthning of it and terrour of the Citizens, raised a pas∣sing large and strong Castle upon the brow of the hill: and almost at the very same time, Remigius Bishop of Dorchester for to give credit and ornament thereto translated hither his Episcopall seat from Dorchester, which was in the most remote corner of his Dioecesse and a small Towne. And when by this time that Church which Pauli∣nus had built was quite gone to decay, the same Remigius having purchased certaine houses with grounds lying unto them, in the very highest place of the City, neere unto the Castle (as Henry of Huntingdon saith) mounting up aloft with high and stately towres, built in a strong place a strong Church, in a faire plot a faire Church, and dedicated it to the Virgin of Virgins; notwithstanding the Archbishop of Yorke was enraged thereat, who chalenged to himselfe the propriety of the soile: and in it ordained 44. Prebendaries. Which Church after∣wards being sorely defaced with fire, as he saith, Alexander that most bountiful Bishop of Lin∣colne repaired, with skilfull artificiall workemanship. Of whom William of Malmesbury reporteth, because for his little low stature hee was a dwarfe among men, his minde laboured to rise aloft and shew it selfe to the world, with outward workes. And as concerning his boun∣ty a Poet of that time among other things wrote thus: Qui dare festinans gratis, ne danda rogentur, Quod nondum dederat, nondum se credit habere. Who hastening frankly for to give, for feare that folke should crave: He never thought that he had that which yet he never gave. Besides these two Bishops already mentioned Robert Bloet who sat there before Alexander, R. de Beaumeis, Hugh a Burgundian and their Successours, by little and little brought this Church, which could not bee one Bishops worke, to the stately magnificence that now it carryeth. Certes, as it is built, it is all throughout not one∣ly most sumptuous, but also passing beautifull, and that with rare and singular work∣manship: but especially that fore-front at the West end, which in a sort ravisheth and allureth the eyes of all that come toward it. In this Church, although there bee di∣vers Monuments of Bishops and others, yet these onely seeme memorable: That of Copper wherein the bowels of that right noble and vertuous Queene Aeleonor wife to King Edward the First are bestowed, who died at Hardby in this Shire: as also these following, wherein lye interred Sir Nicolas Cantlow, one or two of the Family of Burghersh: Lady Catherine Swinford the third wife of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster and mother of the house of Somerset, with whom lyeth buryed Joan her daughter, se∣cond wife to Raulph Nevill the first Earle of Westmerland, who enriched her husband with many happy children. The Bishops Diocesse of Lincolne not content with those streit limits, where∣with the Bishops of Sidnacester, Sidnacester. who had Episcopall jurisdiction over this shire con∣tented themselves in the Primitive Church of the English Nation, conteined under it so many countries, as that the greatnesse thereof was burdenous unto it: And al∣though King Henry the Second tooke out of it the Province of Ely, and King Henry the Eighth the Bishopricks of Peterbourgh, and of Oxford, yet still at this day it is counted the greatest Diocesse by farre of all England, both for jurisdiction and num∣ber of shires: and the Bishop hath in his Diocesse one thousand two hundred forty seven Parish Churches. Many and great Bishops since Remigius his time have governed this See, whom to reckon up is no part of my purpose. For, I will not insist either upon Robert Bloet, from whom King William Rufus wrung 50000. pounds, for securing his title in the very City of Lincolne it selfe, which was found defective: nor upon that prodigall and profuse Alexander, who in exceeding stately buildings was so excessively deligh∣ted: ne yet upon Hugh the Burgundian Canonized a Saint, R. Hoveden. whose corps King John, with his Nobles and friends about him to performe (as mine author saith) a dutifull service to God and that holy Saint, late Bishop, carried upon their shoulders to his buriall. How∣beit, the memory of two Prelates I must needs renew afresh: the one is Robert Grosthead, Grosthead, he died ann. 1233. Matth. Paris. Anonymus Chronographus. a man so well seene both in literature and in the learned tongues, in that age, as it is incredible: and to use the words of one then living, A terrible reproover of the Pope, an adviser of his Prince and Soveraigne, a lover of verity, a corrector of Prelates, a director of Priests, an instructor of the Clergy, a maintainer of Schollers, a Preacher to the people, a diligent searcher into the Scriptures, a mallet of the Romanists, &c. The other is mine owne Praeceptor, whom in all duty I must ever love and honour, that right re∣verend Father Thomas Cooper, who hath notably well deserved both of all the learned and also of the Church, in whose Schoole I both confesse and rejoice that I received education. The City it selfe also flourished a long time: being ordained by King Edward the Third for the Staple, The Staple. as they tearme it, that is, the Mart, of Wooll, Lea∣ther, Lead, &c. Which although it hath not been over-laied with any grievous ca∣lamities, as being once onely set on fire, once also besieged in vaine by King Ste∣phen, who was there vanquished and taken prisoner, forced also and won by King Henry the Third, when the rebellious Barons, who had procured Lewis of France to chalenge the Crowne of England, defended it against him, without any great dam∣mage; yet incredible it is how much it hath been empaired by little and little, con∣quered as it were with very age and time: so that of fifty Churches which it had standing in our Great-grandfathers daies, there are now remaining scarce eighteene. It is remooved, that I may note this also, from the Aequator, 53. degrees and 12. scru∣ples: and from the West point, 22. degrees and 52. scruples. Highdike. As that Street-way called Highdike goeth on directly from Stanford to Lincolne, so from hence Northward it runneth with an high and streight causey, (though heere and there it be interrupted) forward for ten miles space to a little Village called the Spittle in the Street, and beyond: By the which as I passed, I observed moreover, about three miles from Lincolne, another High-port-way also, called Ould-street, to turne out of this High dike Westward, carrying a bancke likewise evident to be seene, which, as I take it, went to AGELOCUM, the next baiting towne, or place of lodging, from LINDUM, in the time of the Romanes. But I will leave these, and proceed in the course that I have begun. Witham being now past Lincolne, runneth downe not far from Wragbye, a member of the Barony called Trusbut, Barons of Trusbut. the title whereof is come by the Barons Roos un∣to the Mannours now Earles of Rutland. Then approcheth it to the ruines of a fa∣mous Abbay in times past called , Bardney. Oswalds ban∣ner. commonly Bardney ; where Bede wri∣teth, that King Oswald was Entombed, with a Banner of gold and purple hanged over his Tombe. The writers in the foregoing age, thought it not sufficient to celebrate the memory of this most Christian worthy King Oswald, unlesse unto his glorious exploits they stitched also ridiculous miracles. But that his hand remained heere uncorrupted many hundred yeeres after, our Ancestours have beleeved, and a Poet of good antiquity hath written in this wise, Nullo verme perit, nulla putredine tabet Dextra viri, nullo constringi frigore, nullo Dissolvi fervore potest; sed semper eodem Immutata statu persistit, mortua vivit. The mans right hand by no worme perisht is, No rottennesse doth cause it putrifie; No binding cold can make it starke, ywis, Nor melting heat, dissolve and mollifie; But alwayes in one state persist it will Such as it was: though dead, it liveth still. This Abbay, In the Appen¦dix of Ingulp as writeth Peter of Bloys, being sometime burnt downe to the ground by the Danes furious outrage, and for many revolutions of yeeres altogether forlorne, that no∣ble and devout Earle of Lincolne Gilbert de Gaunt reedified, and in most thankfull affecti∣onate minde assigned unto it with many other possessions, the tithes of all his Manours where∣soever throughout England. Then, is Witham encreased with Ban a little River, which out of the midst of Lindsey runneth downe, Hornecastle▪ first by Horne Castle, which belonged in times past to Alice. Adeliza of Condie, and was laid even with the ground in the Raigne of Stephen, afterwards became a capitall seat of the Barony of Gerard de Rodes, and pertaineth now, as I have heard, to the Bishop of Carlile: From thence, by Scrivel∣by, a Manour of the Dimockes who hold it hereditarily devolved upon them from the Marmions, Dimockes. Inq. 23. E. 3. by Sir J. Ludlow, and that by service, (to use now the Lawyers words) Of Grand Serjeanty, The Kings Champion. viz. That whensoever any King of England is to bee crowned, then the Lord of this Manour, for the time being, or some one in his name (if himselfe bee unable) shall come well armed for the warre, Fines Micha. Anno 1. H. 6. mounted upon a good horse of service, in presence of the Soveraigne Lord the King upon his Coronation day; and cause Proclamation to bee made, that if any man will avouch that the said Soveraigne Lord the King, hath not right to his Kingdome and Crowne, he will be prest and ready to defend the right of the King, of his King∣dome, of his Crowne and dignity, with his body, against him, and all others whatsoever. Some∣what lower, Tatteshall. The Ban at Tatteshall a little Towne standing in a Marish Country, but ve∣ry commodiously, well knowne by reason of the Castle, built for the most part of bricke, and the Barons thereof, runneth into Witham. They write that Eudo and Pinso two Noblemen of Normandy, loving one another entirely as sworne brethren, by the liberall gift of King William the Conquerour received many Lordships and faire lands in this tract, which they parted so, as that Tatteshall fell to Eudo, which he held by Barony, from whose posterity it came by Dryby and the Bernacks unto Sir Raulph Cromwell, Cromwell. whose sonne bearing the same name, and being under King Henry the Sixth Lord Treasurer of England, departed out of this world without issue: but unto Pinso fell Eresby, Eresby. Lords Wil∣loughbey. which is not farre off: From whose progeny, the inheritance descended by the Becks unto the Willoughbeies: unto whom there came also an en∣crease both of honour, and also of faire Livelods by their wives, not onely from the Uffords Earles of Suffolke ; Lords Wels Lords de Engain. but also from the Lords of Welles, who brought with them very faire possessions and lands of the family de Engain Lords of ancient Nobi∣lity, and from the first comming in of the Normans of great power in these parts. A∣mong these Willoughbeis one excelled all the rest in the Raigne of Henry the Fifth, na∣med Sir Robert Willoughby, who for his martiall prowesse was created Earle of Van∣dosme in France, and from these by the mothers side descended Peregrine Berty, Baron Willoughby of Eresby, a man for his generous minde and military valour renowned both in France, and the Low-countries. Witham now approching neere unto the Sea, enter∣taineth out of the North another small namelesse River; at the spring head where∣of standeth Bollingbroke Castle, situate upon a low ground, and built of a soft and crumbling stone by William de Romara Earle of Lincolne, taken from Alice Lacey by King Edward the Second, because she married against his will; and ennobled in that it was the Birth-place of King Henry the Fourth, who thereof was named Henry of Bollingbroke. Bollingbroke. At which time it beganne to be reckoned among those Honorable Ma∣nours, which are termed Honours. And Witham, after it hath received this Riveret, having passed through Boston, as I have said, dischargeth it selfe at length into the German Sea. From the mouth of Witham the shore shutteth forth with a mighty swelling bent into the German Sea, as farre as to Humber a great Arme of the Sea, being every where slashed and indented with many small Washes and places which the salt wa∣ter breaketh into: and hath but few Townes upon it, because there be few Havens there: and the shelves or barres of sand lie every where anenst the land. Yet of these few Townes which take up this Coast, Wainfleet. some be memorable: and Wainefleet especially, if it were but for this cause onely, that it bred William Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester, a worthy Prelat, founder of Mawdlen College in Oxford, a man that singularly well deserved of learning. Alford. Baron Welles. Then Alford, which for the Mercate is beholden to Lion Lord Welles, who obtained for it this priviledge from King Henry the Sixth. This Family of Welles, was very ancient and honourable: and the last of that name had to wife a daughter of King Edward the Fourth, and being by King Henry the Seventh crea∣ted Vicount Welles, died having no issue. But the inheritance, by the Females came to the Willoughbeys, * Dimockes, De la Launds, Hoes, and others. More inward are Driby and Ormesby neighbour Townes, which gave sirnames to two great families in their times; from the Dribyes descended the elder Lords Cromwell, now determined, and from Ormesbyes the house of Skipwith, still continuing. After this, ye have Louth a little Mercate Towne well frequented, which had the name of Lud a small River, that run∣neth under Cokerington the capitall place in times past of the Barony of Scoteney. And then Grimsby, Grimsby. which our Sabins or conceited persons dreaming what they list, and following their owne fansies, will have to be so called of one Grime a Merchant, who for that hee had brought up a little foundling of the Danes royall blood named Haveloke, when it had beene cast forth to perish, or to take his lucke or fortune, is much talked of, together with Haveloke that lucky foster-childe of his: who having beene first a skullen in the Kings kitchin, and afterwards promoted to the marriage of the Kings daughter for his heroicall valour in feates of Armes, and I wot not what, worthy exploits. A narration right well beseeming and meetest for them that take pleasure to passe out the long nights with telling of old wives tales. But the honour and ornament of this place was the right reverend Doctour Whitgift late Archbishop of Canterbury, a peerelesse Prelate for piety and learning in our daies. Scarce six miles from hence, more within the country there sheweth it selfe an an∣cient Castle, Castor. Thong-caster. which at this day is called Castor, in the old English Saxons Tongue , and Thong-caster, in British Caer Egarry: in both languages it is aptly named so of the thing, Byrsa. to wit, of an hide cut into peeces, like as Byrsa, that Castle or Citadell of the Carthaginians so well knowne. For, our Annales record, that Hengist the Saxon, after he had vanquished the Picts and Scots, and received very large possessions in other places, obtained also in this tract of Vortigern, so much ground as hee could compasse round about with an Oxe hide cut out into very small laners, that we call Thongs, wherein he founded and built this Castle. Whence it is that one, who hath written in verse a Breviary of the British History, turned Virgils verses in this maner. Accepítque solum, facti de nomine In Virgil, Byrsam. Thongum, Taurino quantum poter at circundare tergo. And ground he tooke, which Thong he call'd when he did first begin, As much as he, a Bull hide cut could well enclose within. From Grimsby, the Shore draweth in with a great reach to make way for to admit Humber, Thorton College. by Thornton a religious house in times past instituted for the Worship of God, by William the Grosse Earle of Aumarle: also by Barton, where there is a very notable Ferry or passage over into York-shire. Barton upon Humber. Hard by, Ankam a little muddy River, and therefore full of Eeles, emptieth it selfe into Humber : neere unto the spring-head whereof is Merket-Rasin, so called of a Mercate there well resorted unto. Somewhat higher stands Angotby, now corruptly called Osgodby belonging in times past to the family of Semarc, from whom it descended hereditarily to the Airmins: also Kelsay, a Lordship in old time of the Hansards, men of great name in this shire, from whom in right of the wives it came to the family of the Ascoghs, Knights. But after this, An∣kam hath a bridge over it, at Glanford, a small Mercate Towne, which the common people, of the said bridge, so commonly call Brigg, that the true name is almost quite forgotten. Kettleby. Tirwhitt. Next unto it, within a Parke I saw Kettleby the seat of the worshipfull anci∣ent family of the Tirwhits, Knights, descended from Grovil Oxenbridge, and Eching∣ham. But in times past it was the habitation, as a man may gather by the name, of one Ketell (which was in the time of the Saxons and Danes an usuall name). Bye what it is. For Bye in the English-Saxon language signifieth A dwelling place, and Byan, To dwell: whence it is that so many places both elsewhere in England, and heere especially in this Shire doe end in Bie. All this Tract-over at certaine seasons, good God, what store of fowles (to say no∣thing of fishes) is heere to be found! I meane not those vulgar birds which in other places are highly esteemed and beare a great price, Delicate fowles. as Teales, Quailes, Woodcockes, Phesants, Partridges, &c. but such as we have no Latine names for, the very delicate dainties, indeed, of service, meates for the Demigods, and greatly sought for by these that love the tooth so well, Knotts. Dotterell . I meane, Puitts, Godwitts, Knotts, that is to say Canu∣tus or Knouts birds, (for, out of Denmarke they are thought to fly thither), Dotterels, so named of their dotish foolishnesse, which being a kinde of birds as it were of an apish kinde, ready to imitate what they see done, are caught by candle light accor∣ding to fowlers gesture; if he put forth an arme, they also stretch out a wing: sets he forward his legge, or holdeth up his head, they likewise doe theirs: in briefe, what ever the fowler doth, the same also doth this foolish bird untill it bee hidden within the net. But these things I leave to their observation, who either take plea∣sure earnestly to hunt after Natures workes, or being borne to pamper the belly de∣light to send their estates downe the throat. More Westward, the River Trent also after he hath ended his long course, is recei∣ved into the Humber, after it hath with his sandy banke bounded this shire from Fosse∣dike hither; Stow. having runne downe first not farre from Stow, where Godive the wife of Earle Leofricke built a Monastery; which for the low site that it hath under the hills, Henry of Huntingdon saith to have beene founded Vnder the Promontory of Lincolne: Then, Knath. neere unto Knath, now the habitation of Baron Willoughy of Parrham, in times past of the family of the Barons Darcy, who had very much encrease both in honor and also of possessions by the daughter and heire of the Meinills. This Family of the Darcyes proceeded from another more ancient, to wit, from one whose name was Norman de Adrecy or Darcy de Nocton, Darcy de No∣cton and Knath who flourished in high reputation under King Henry the Third; and whose successours endowed with lands the little Nunnery at Alvingham in this County. But this dignity is as it were extinct, for that the last Norman in the right line which is more ancient, Fines 29. E. 3. left behinde him onely two sisters: of which the one was married to Roger Pedwardine, the other to Peter of Limbergh. Then runneth the Trent downe to Gainesborrow, Gainesborrow a towne ennobled by reason of the Danes ships that lay there at rode, and also for the death of Suene Tiugs-Kege, a Danish Tyrant, who after he had robbed and spoiled the country, as Matthew of Westminster writeth, being heere stabbed to death by an unknowne man, suffered due punishment at length for his wickednesse and villany. Many a yeere after this, it became the possession of Sir William de Valence Earle of Pembroch, who obtained for it of king Ed∣ward the First the liberty to keepe a Faire: From which Earle by the Scottish Earles of Athol, Barons Borrough. and the Piercies, descended the Barons of Bourough who heere dwelt: con∣cerning whom I have written already in Surry. In this part of the Shire stood long since the City Sidnacester, Sidnacester. which affoorded a See to the Bishops of this Tract, who were called the Bishops of Lindifars: But this City is now so farre out of all sight and knowledge, that together with the name the very ruines also seeme to have pe∣rished, for by all my curious enquiry, I could learne nothing of it. Neither must I overpasse, that in this Quarter, at Melwood there flourished the fa∣mily of Saint Paul, corruptly called Sampoll, Knights; which I alwaies thought to have beene of that ancient Castilion race of the Earles of Saint Paul in France. But, the Coat-Armour of Luxemburgh, which they beare, implieth that they are come out of France since that the said Castilion stocke of Saint Paul, Saint Paul. was by marriage im∣planted into that of Luxemburgh, which happened two hundred yeeres since or thereabout. Above this place the Rivers of Trent, Idell and Dane doe so disport themselves with the division of their streames, and Marishes caused by them and other Springs, as they enclose within them the River-Island of Axelholme, Axelholme. in the Saxon Tongue , which is a parcell of Lincolne-shire. It carryeth in length from South to North ten miles, and in breadth not past halfe so much. The flat and lower part of it toward the Rivers is marish ground, Gals, a shrub. and bringeth forth an odoriferous kinde of shrub which they tearme Gall. It yeeldeth also Pets in the Mores, and dead rootes of fir∣wood which in burning give a ranke sweet savour. There also have beene found great and long firre-trees while they digged for Pet, both within the Isle, and also without, * at La ghton upon Trent banke, the old habitation of the family of D'alanson, now contractly called Dalison. The middle parts of this Isle, where it riseth gently with some ascent is fruitefull and fertile, and yeeldeth flax in great aboundance: also the Alabaster stone, Alabastrites. and yet the same being not very solide but brittle, is more meet for pargetting and plaister-worke, than for other uses. The chiefe Towne called in old time Axel, is now named Axey, whence, by putting to the Saxon word Holme, which they used for a River-Island, the name no doubt was compoun∣ded. But scarce deserveth it to bee called a Towne, it is so scatteringly inhabited: and yet it is able to shew the plot of ground where a Castle stood, that was rased in the Barons warre, and which belonged to the Mowbraies, who at that time possessed a great part of the Isle. In the yeere 1173. as writeth an old Chronographer, Roger de Mowbray forsaking his Allegeance to the Elder Henry the Se∣cond, in regard of his sonne whom he had made King with him. King, repaired the Castle at Kinard Ferry in the Isle of Ax∣holme, which had beene of old time destroyed. Against whom a number of Lincoln-shire men making head, when they had passed over the water in barges, laid siege to the Castle, for∣ced the Constable thereof and all the souldiers to yeeld, and overthrew the said Castle. Some∣what higher is Botterwic, the Lord whereof Sir Edmund Sheffeld, King Edward the Sixth created the first Baron Sheffeld of Botherwic: who for his country spent his life against the Rebels in Norfolke, having begotten of Anne Vere the Earle of Oxfords daughter, a sonne named John, the second Baron, and father to Edmund now Lord Sheffeld, a right honourable Knight of the Garter, President of the Councell esta∣blished in the North. But more into the North I saw Burton Stather standing upon the other side of Trent, whereof I have hetherto read nothing memorable. Earles of Lin∣colne. This Shire glorieth in the Earles which have borne Title thereof. After Egga who flourished in the yeere 710. and Morcar both Saxons, and who were Earles by office, onely, William de Romara a Norman, was the first Earle after the Conquest, in whose roome being dead (for neither his sonne, whereas he died before his father, nor his grand-child enjoied this title) King Stephen placed Gilbert de Gaunt. After whose de∣cease Simon de Saint Lyz, 2. H. 2. the younger, the sonne of Earle Simon, (you reade the very words of Robert Montensis, who lived about that time) Wanting lands, by the gracious gift of King Henry the Second tooke his onely daughter to wife, with her his honour also. After this Lewis of France, who was by the seditious Barons brought into England girt a second Gilbert out of the Family de Gaunt, with the sword of the Earldome of Lincolne: but when the said Lewis was soone after expelled the land, no man acknow∣ledged him for Earle, and himselfe of his owne accord relinquished that title. Then Raulph the sixth Earle of Chester obtained this honour of King Henry the Third, who a little before his death gave unto Hawise or Avis his sister (the wife of Robert De Quincy ) by Charter, the Earledome of Lincolne, so farre forth as appertained unto him, that shee might bee Countesse thereof: For in this tenour runne the very words of the Charter. She likewise bestowed it upon John de Lacy Constable of Chester, and the heires whom hee should beget of the body of Margaret her daughter. This John had issue Edmund, who dying before his mother left this honour for Henry his sonne to enjoy, who was the last Earle of that line: For when his sonnes were taken away by untimely death, and he had but one little daughter onely remaining alive named Alice, hee affianced her, being but nine yeeres old, to Thomas the sonne of Edmund Earle of Lancaster, Lib. Monaster. de Stanlow. with this condition, That if he should fortune to dye without heires of her body, or if they happened to dye without heires of their bodies, his Castles, Lordships, &c. should in Remainder come to the heires of Edmund Earle of Lancaster for ever. But the said Alice had no childe at all by her husband Thomas: But when Thomas her husband was beheaded, shee that by her light behaviour had not a little steined her good name, tooke Sir Eubul le Strange, with whom she had lived before time too familiar∣ly, for her husband, 2. Edw. . without the assent and privity of her Soveraigne; who being here∣at highly offended, seised her possessions into his owne hands. Yet both Sir Eubul Strange, and Sir Hugh Frene her third husband, are in some Records named Earles of Lincolne. After Alice, now very aged, was departed this life without issue, Henry Earle of Lancaster Nephew to Edmund aforesaid by his second sonne, entred upon her large and faire patrimony by vertue of that conveiance (which I spake of be∣fore) and from that time it accrued to the House of Lancaster. Escaet. 1. E. 3. N. 134. Howbeit the Kings of England at their pleasure have bestowed the name and honour of Earles of Lin∣colne, as, See Dukes of Suffolke. King Edward the Fourth gave it to Sir John De la Pole: and King Henry the Eighth, to Henry Brandon, both the Sonnes of the Dukes of Suffolke, who both ended this life without Issue; the first slaine in the battaile at Stoke, and the other taken away by the sweating sicknesse. Anno 14. Elizabethae. Afterward Queene Elizabeth promoted Ed∣ward Baron Clinton Lord high Admirall of England, to the said honour, which his sonne Henry enjoyeth at this day. There are in this Shire Parishes much about 630. NOTINGAMIAE Comitatus olim pars CORITANORVM NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE. V Pon the West side of Lincolne-shire confineth the County of NOTTINGHAM, in the English Saxon tongue , and in English Nottingham-shire, being farre lesse in quantity; limited Northward with York-shire, Westward with Darby-shire, and in some parts with York-shire, and on the South side with Leicester-shire. The South and East part there∣of are made more fruitfull by the noble and famous River Trent, with other Riverets resorting unto it. The West part is taken up with the Forest of Shirewood, which stretcheth out a great way. This part because it is sandy, the Inhabitants tearme The Sand, the other, for that it is Clayish, they call the Clay: and so have divided their Country into these two parts. The River Trent, The river Trent. in the old English Saxon tongue (which some Anti∣quaries of small note and account have called Triginta in Latine, for the affinity of the French word Trent that signifieth that number Triginta, that is, thirty ) having gone a long journey, so soone as hee is entred into this Shire, and hath ( recepto Souro flumine ex agro Leicestrensi, taking in the River Soure from the field of Leicester ) runne by Steanford, where I have learned there be many tokens remaining of old antiquity, and peeces of Roman money oftentimes found; and then by Clifton, which hath gi∣ven both habitation and sirname also to the ancient family of the Cliftons, much en∣riched by one of the heires of Cressy, Lin a riveret. taketh in from the West the little River Lin, which rising neere unto Newsted, that is, New place, where sometime King Henry the Second founded a small Abbay, and which is now the dwelling house of the anci∣ent Family of the Burons, Byron. descended from Ralph de Buron, who at the first comming in of the Normans flourished in great state, * both in this Countrey and also in Lanca∣shire ; runneth hard by Wallaton rich in veines of cole, Wollaton▪ where Sir Francis Willoughby a Knight nobly descended from the Greis Marquesse Dorset, in our daies built out of the ground with great charges (upon a vaine ostentation of his wealth) a stately house with artificiall workemanship, standing bleakely, but offering a very goodly prospect to the beholders farre and neere. Then runneth it by Linton or Lenton, Lenton. much frequented and famous in old time for the Abbay there of the Holy Trinity, founded by William Peverell, the base sonne of King William the Conquerour; but now all the fame is onely for a Faire there kept. Where, on the other banke at the very meeting well neere of Lin and Trent, the principall Towne that hath given name unto the Shire is seated upon the side of an hill now called Nottingham, Nottingham. (by softning the old name a little) for ; for, so the English Saxons named it of certaine caves and passages under the ground, which in old time they hewed and wrought hollow under those huge and steepe cliffes, which are on the South side hanging over the little River Lin, for places of receit and refuge, yea and for habitations. And thereupon Asserius interpreteth this Saxon word in Latine Speluncarum domum, that is, An house of Dennes or Caves, and in the British Tui ogo bauc, which signifieth the very selfe same. The Towne for the naturall site thereof is right pleasant: as where, on the one hand lye faire and large Medowes by the Rivers side, on the other, rise hils with a gentle and easie ascent: and is plentifully provided of all things beside, necessary for mans life. On the one side Shirewood yeeldeth store of wood to maintaine fire, al∣though many use for that purpose stinking pit cole digged forth of the ground: on the other, Trent serveth it aboundantly with fish. And hence hath beene taken up this od barbarous Verse, Limpida sylva focum, Trent. Triginta dat mihi piscem. Shire-wood yeelds me fuell for fire, As Trent yeelds fish, what I require. At a word, for largenesse, for building, for three faire Churches, a passing spacious and beautifull Mercat place, and a most strong Castle, it maketh a goodly shew. The said Castle is mounted upon an huge and steepe worke on the West side of the City, in which place it is thought that Castle stood in times past upon whose strength the Danes presuming held out against the Siege of Aethered and Aelfrid so long, untill they frustrate of their purpose brake up their Siege, trussed up bagge and baggage and dislodged. For when the Danes had taken this Castle, Burthred King of the Mercians (as mine Authour Asserius writeth) and the Mercians, addresse their messen∣gers to Aethered King of the West Saxons, and to Aelfred his brother, humbly beseeching them to come and aide them, that so they might give battaile to the fore-named Army, which request they also easily obtained. For, those two brethren slacking no whit their promise, ha∣ving levied from all parts a mighty Army, assembled their forces, entred Mercia, and seek∣ing with one accord jointly to encounter the enemy, come as farre as to Snottenga-ham. And when the Painims keeping themselves within the defense of the Castle refused to give battaile, and the Christians with all their force could not batter the Wall, after peace concluded be∣tweene the Paganes and Mercians, those two brethren with their bands returned home. But after this, King Edward the elder, built the Village Bridgeford just over against it, and compassed the Towne about with a wall, which now is fallen downe; and yet the remaines thereof I have seene on the South side. And within very few yeeres after, in King Edward the Confessours time, as wee reade in Domesday booke, there were numbered in it one hundred and seventy three Burgesses, and from the two Minters, there were paid forty shillings to the King. Also the water of Trent, the Fosse dike, and the way toward Yorke were warded and kept, that if any man hindered the passage of vessels, he was to make amends with the payment of foure pounds. As for the Castle which now wee see, it may bee well of great name in regard both of the Founder, and the worthinesse also of the worke: for William of Nor∣mandy built it to bridle the English; and so strong it was, as William of Newborough writeth, as well by naturall situation as hand labour, that it is held impregnable (if it may have sufficient men to defend it) unlesse it bee by famine. Afterward also King Edward the Fourth bestowed great cost in the repairing of it, and beautified it with faire buildings: whereto King Richard also the Third set to his helping hand. Neither for all the changes and alterations of times, hath it undergone the common conditi∣on or destiny incident to such great Castles, being never forced and wonne by as∣sault. Once was it in vaine besieged by Henry of Anjou, at which time the souldiers lying in Garison set fire upon the buildings joyning unto it. 1175. Rog. Hoveden. Pag. 307. Once also it was sud∣denly surprised by Earle Robert de Ferrarijs in the Barons warre, who spoiled the In∣habitants of all their goods. The Castellanes report many stories of David King of the Scots prisoner in it, and of Roger Mortimer Earle of March, taken heere in a hollow secret passage under the ground, who because he prised his faith and loyalty to his country lighter than Scotish gold, and with a vaste minde designed other mis∣chiefes, was afterwards hanged. Certes, in the first base Court of the Castle wee went downe by many steps or staires with candle light into a Vault under the ground and certaine close roomes wrought out of the very rocke, in the walles whereof are engraven the stories of Christs Passion and other things, by the hand (as they say) of David the Second, king of Scots, who was there imprisoned. But in the upper part of the Castle which riseth up aloft upon a rocke, we came also by many staires into a∣nother Cave likewise under the ground, Mortimers hole. which they call Mortimers Hole, for that in it the foresaid Roger Mortimer lay hidden, when as being guilty to himselfe of wicked∣nesse he stood in feare of his life. As for the position of Nottingham, it seeth the North Pole elevated fifty three Degrees, and hath the Meridian two and twenty Degrees and foureteene minutes distant from the utmost point of the West, whence Geographers beginne to mea∣sure the Longitude. Pier pount. From hence the Trent runneth with a milde streame and passeth forward by Holme, called of the Lords thereof Holme De Petrae ponte. Pierpount, whose Family is both ancient and noble, and out of which Robert Pierpount was summoned by King Edward the Third unto the high Court of Parliament, among the Barons of the Kingdome; unto Shelford where Ralph Hanselin founded a Priory, Barony of Sheleford. and the Lords Bardolph had a man∣sion, but now the seat of the worshipfull stocke of the Stanhopes, knights; whose state in this Tract hath growne great and their name renowned since they matched with an heire of Mallovell. From whence he runneth downe with a rolling streame to Stoke, Battaile of Stoke. a little Village, but well knowne for no small overthrow and slaughter that there happened: when Sir John de la pole Earle of Lincolne, who being by King Ri∣chard the Third declared heire apparent to the Crowne, seeing by the comming of king Henry the Seventh himselfe debarred of the hope of the Kingdome, heere in behalfe of a counterfeit Prince rebelliously opposed himselfe against a lawfull king, and so resolutely with his friends and followers lost his life. Not farre from hence is Thurgarton where Sir Ralph D'eincourt founded a Priory, and somewhat higher Southwell sheweth it selfe aloft, Suthwell. with a Collegiat Church of Prebendaries consecra∣ted to the blessed Virgin Mary, a place not very faire in outward shew, I must needs say, but strong, ancient, and of great fame. Which, as they write, Paulinus the First Archbishop of Yorke founded, after he had baptised the Inhabitants of this Shire in the River Trent, and so regenerated them to Christ. Since which time, the Arch∣bishops of Yorke have had here a very faire and stately Palace and three Parkes sto∣red with Deere adjoyning thereto. Tio-vul-Finga-cester. That this is the City which Bede calleth Tio-vul-Finga-cester, I doe the more stedfastly beleeve, because, those things which he hath reported of Paulinus baptizing in the Trent neere unto Tio-vul-Finga-cester, the pri∣vate History of this Church constantly avoucheth to have beene done in this very place. From thence out of the East, Snite a little Brooke runneth into Trent, which being but small and shallow watereth Langer, a place of name in regard of the Tibe∣tots or Tiptofts Lords thereof, Tiptofts. who afterwards became Earles of Worcester: also Wi∣verton, which from Heriz a worshipfull man long since in these parts, came by the Brets and Caltostes unto the Chaworthes, Chaworths. who fetch their name out of the Cahors in Quercy. Cadurci in France, and derive their pedegree from the Lord of Walchervill. Now doth Trent divide it selfe, neere Averham or Aram an ancient habitation of the Suttons Gentlemen of respective worth, and runneth hard under a good great Towne called Newark, as one would say, The new worke, of the new Castle, which Castle so fresh and of so beautifull building, as Henry of Huntingdon termeth it, Alexan∣der that bountifull minded Bishop of Lincolne built: which Prelate, that I may use the words of an ancient Historian, carrying a most brave and gallant minde, builded both this Castle and another also with most profuse and lavish expense. And because such manner of sumptuous buildings little became the gravity and dignity of a Bishop, he to take away the en∣vie and hard conceit of the world for such building, and to expiate, as it were, the offence that grew thereby, founded as many Monasteries and filled them with religious Brethren. Ne∣verthelesse, this vaine prodigality and lavish spending that was in a military Bishop, was pursued afterwards with condigne punishment. For, King Stephen, who labou∣red nothing more than to establish his tottering estate in his Kingdome by seizing into his hands all the strongest holds thereof, brought this Prelate, what with hard imprisoning, and, in a sort, with famishing him, to that passe, that will'd hee nill'd he, 1216. at length hee yeelded up unto him both this Castle, and that other at Sleford in Lincolne-shire. Neither is there any other memorable matter heere to be related, but that King John finished in this place the most wearisome course of his troublesome life; and King Edward the Sixth incorporated it of one Alderman, and twelve As∣sistants. From hence the River gathering himselfe againe into one Chanell, run∣neth directly Northward, beset on both sides with Villages; neither affoordeth it any matter worth remembrance before it come to Littleborrough, Littlebor∣rough. a little Towne in deed and truely answering to the name, where, as there is at this day a Ferry much used, so there was in times past that Station, whereof Antonine the Emperour once or twice made mention, Agelocum or Segelocum. and which according to sundry Copies is called AGELO∣CUM or SEGELOCUM. This Towne have I heretofore sought for in vaine, about the Country adjoyning: but now I am verily perswaded and assured that I have found it out, both for that it standeth upon the old Port High-way, and also because the field lying to it sheweth expresse tokens of Walles; and besides affoordeth unto Ploughmen every day ma∣ny peeces of the Roman Emperours Coine: which because Swine many times rooting into the ground turne up with their snouts, the country people call Swines∣peni s. Who also according to their simple capacity are of opinion, that their fore∣fathers in times past fensed and mounded that field with a stone. Wall against the water of Trent that useth in Winter time to overflow and make great flouds. In the West part of this Shire, which they tearme The Sand, and where Erwash a little Riveret hieth apace into Trent, Strelley, in old time Strellegh sheweth it selfe, a place that gave both sirname and habitation to the Family of the Strelleis, com∣monly called Sturleyes, Knights; one of the most ancient Houses in all this Coun∣try. More inward, Shirewood. the Forest Shirewood (which some expound by these Latine names Limpida Sylva, that is, A Shire or Cleere wood ; others Praclara Sylva, in the same sence and signification) in ancient times over-shadowed all the Country over with greene leaved branches, and the boughs and armes of trees twisted one within ano∣ther, so implicated the Woods together, that a man could scarcely goe alone in the beaten pathes: But now the trees grow not so thicke, yet hath it an infinite number of fallow Deere, yea and Stagges with their stately branching heads feeding within it. Mansfield. Some Townes also: among which Mansfield carryeth away the name, as main∣taining a great Mercat passing well served, and as well frequented. The name of which Towne, they that delineat the Pedegree of the Graves of the great family of Mansfield in Germany, use as an argument to proove the same, and set downe that the first Earle of Mansfield was one of King Arthurs Knights of the Round Table, borne and bred at this Mansfield. Indeed our Kings used in old time to retyre them∣selves hether for the love of hunting: and, that you may reade the very words out of an ancient Inquisition, W. Fauconberge, tenebat Manerium de Cukeney in hoc Comitatu in Sergientia, per Servitium ferrandi Palsredum Regis quando Rex veniret ad Mansfield, that is, W. Fauconberge held the Manour of Cukeney in this County in Sergiency, by ser∣vice to shooe the Kings Palfrey when the King came to Mansfield. And the hereditary Fo∣resters or Keepers of this Forest of Shirewood were men in their times of high esti∣mation, viz. Sir Gerarde de Normanvile in the time of the Conquest, the Cauzes and Birkins, L. Everingham. by whose heire it came to the Everinghams. Of which Family Sir Adam Everingham was summoned to Parliaments in the Raignes of King Edward the Se∣cond, and King Edward the Third: At which time they were seated at Laxton, an∣ciently called Lexinton, Lexinton. where also flourished a great Family so sirnamed, whose heires were marryed into the Houses of Sutton of Averham and Markham. Out of this Wood there spring many Riverets that runne into the Trent: but Idle is thought to bee the chiefe: Idle the river. upon which neere unto Idleton in the yeere 616. that felicity and prosperous successe which for a long time had accompanied Ethered that most puissant King of Northumberland, was overtaken and forsooke him quite. For, whereas before time he had alwaies fought his battailes most fortunately, heere (fortune turning her wheele) he was by Redwald King of the East Angles vanquished and slaine, who in his roome made Edwin then banished from the Kingdome, due unto him from his Ancesters, Soveraigne Ruler over the Northumbers. This little River Idle runneth downe not farre from Markham, Markham. a Village verily but small to speake of, yet gave it name to the Family of the Markhams, which for worth and an∣tiquity hath beene very notable, being descended from one of the heires of Cressy, and formerly from an heire of Lexinton, as I lately shewed. The greatest ornament of this Family was Sir John Markham, who sitting Lord chiefe Justice of England, guided the helme of Justice with so even an hand and so great equity (a thing that I would have you to reade in the English Histories) that his honour and glory shall never perish. Six miles from it Westward, is Workensop, a Towne well knowne for the Liquorice that there groweth and prospereth passing well: Workensop. Liquorice. famous also for the Earle of Shrewsburies House which within our remembrance George Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury built with that magnificence, as beseemeth so great an Earle, and yet such as was not to be envied. This Workensop from the Lovetofts first Lords thereof, under the Normans Raigne, descended by the Furnivalles and Nevil, unto the L. Talbots with a very goodly inheritance. S. Mary of Radford. Of which Lovetofts, G. Lovetoft in the time of King Henry the First, founded here an Abbay, the ruines whereof I have seen toward the East side of the Towne, amidst most pleasant and plentifull pastures: and the West part of the Church standeth still passing faire to be seene with two towre steeples. A little higher upon the same River I saw Blithe a famous Mercate Towne, Blithe. which Bulley or Busly, a Noble man of the Normans blood, fortified with a Castle: but now the very rubbish thereof is hardly to bee seene, time so consumeth all things. But the Abbay there, was founded by Roger Busly and Foulke De Lisieurs: and this is the far∣thest Towne almost in Nottingham-shire, Northward, unlesse it bee Scroby a little Towne of the Archbishops of Yorke, situate in the very confines and frontiers of York-shire. William sirnamed the Conquerour appointed over this Shire William Peverell his base sonne, Lords and Earles of Not∣tingham. Lib. M. Linton. Matth. Paris. p. 126. See Earles of Darby. Matth. Paris. p. 204. Hoveden. pag. 373. b. not with the Title of Earle, but of Lord of Nottingham: who had a sonne that dyed before his father, and hee likewise had a sonne of the same name, whom king Henry the Second disinherited, for that he went about to poison Ranulph Earle of Chester. Much about this time Robert de Ferrarijs, who rifled and ransacked Nottingham, in a Donation which he made unto the Church of Tuttesbury, stiled him∣selfe thus, Robertus Comes junior de Nottingham, that is, Robert the younger Earle of Not∣tingham. But afterwards King Richard the First gave and confirmed unto his bro∣ther John the Earledome and Castle of Nottingham with all the Honour of Peverell. Many yeeres after, King Richard the Second honoured John Lord Mowbray with this Title of Earle of Nottingham ; who dying a young man without issue, his brother Tho∣mas succeeded after him: He being by king Richard the Second created Earle Mare∣shall and Duke of Norfolke, and soone after banished, begat Thomas Earle Mareshall, whom king Henry the Fourth beheaded; and John Mowbray, who, as also his sonne and Nephew, Inq. 6. Rich. 2. See Dukes of Norfolke. were likewise Dukes of Norfolke and Earles of Nottingham. But when as their male issue failed, and that Richard the young sonne of King Edward the Fourth, being Duke of Yorke had borne this Title with others by his Wife the heire of the Mowbraies, but a small while, King Richard the Third honoured William Vicount Barkley descended from the Mowbraies with this Title of Earle of Notting∣ham: and whereas hee dyed without issue, king Henry the Eighth bestowed the same honour upon his illegitimate sonne H. Fitz Roy, when hee created him Duke of Richmond ; but hee departed this life in the flower of his age, leaving no childe. Afterward this Title lay extinct, untill in the yeere of our Lord 1597. Queene Eli∣zabeth by solemne investiture adorned therewith Charles Lord Howard of Effingham, and High Admirall of England, descended from the Mowbraies, in regard of his service (as appeareth in the Charter of his Creation) right valiantly and faithfully performed against the Spanish Armado in the yeere 1588. as also at the winning of Caliz in Spaine, where he was Lord Generall of the forces by sea, like as the Earle of Essex, of those by land. There are in this County Parish Churches 168. DARBY-SHIRE. D ARBY-SHIRE, called in old English-Saxon , li∣eth close to Nottingham-shire Westward, confining with Lei∣cester-shire upon the Southside, like as with Stafford-shire on the West, and York-shire in the North, resembling, as it were, the forme of a Triangle, but not with equall sides. For, where∣as about the point of it lying Southward it is scarce sixe miles broad, it so enlargeth and spreadeth it selfe on both sides, that where it looketh into the North it carrieth much about thirty miles in breadth. The River Derwent, that runneth along the middest of it, divideth it after a sort in two parts, which River breaking out of the North limit thereof and taking his course Southward, sometimes with his blacke waters stained with the Soile and earth that it passeth by, rumbleth downe apace into the Trent: For, Trent overthwarteth the said narrow point, that I spake of, lying Southward. The East side and the South parts are well manured, not unfruitfull, and besides, well sto∣red with Parkes; The West part beyond Derwent which they call the Peake being all of it hilly, or a stony and craggy ground, is more barraine: howbeit rich in lead, iron, and coles, which it yeeldeth plentifully, and also feedeth Sheepe very com∣modiously. In the South corner the first place worth the naming that offereth it selfe to sight, Greisly Castle. The family of the Greisleys. is Greisely Castle, more than broken downe, which together with a little Monastery was founded in times past in honour of Saint George, by the Greiseleies Lords thereof, who fetching their descent from William the sonne of Sir Niele of Grieseley, about the very Conquest of England by the Normans, have flourished unto these dayes in great worship, the which they have not a little augmented long since by marrying with the daughter and heire of the ancient family of Gasteneys. Upon the River Dove, which untill it entreth into Trent divideth this Country from Stafford-shire, we meet with nothing in this Shire but small country Villages, and Ashburne a Mercate towne, where the house of the Cokains flourished a long time; and Norbury, where the right ancient family of the Fitz-Herberts have long inhabited: out of which, Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert hath deserved passing well of the knowledge and profession of our Commons law: The family of the Shirleys. Not farre from which is Shirley an ancient Lordship of the well renowned Family of the Shirleys, who derive their pedegree from one Fulcher: unto whom, beside the antiquity of their house, much honor and faire lands have ac∣crued by marriage with the heires of the Breoses, the Bassets of Brailesford, the Stan∣tons, Lovets, &c. And heere stand round about many places which have given name and Habitation to worshipfull Families: as Longford, Bradburne, Kniveton, from whence came those Knivetons of Mercaston and Bradley: of which house Saint Lo Kniveton is one, * to whose judicious and studious diligence I am deeply endebted: also Keidelston, where the Cursons dwelt, as also at Crokhall. But whether Sir Robert Curson knighted by King Henry the Seventh, Baron Curson. made a Baron of the Empire by Maxi∣milian the Emperour in the yeere 1500. for his singular valour, and thereupon by King Henry the Eigth made a Baron of England with a liberall pension assigned, was descended from these Cursons, I dare not affirme. Heereby is Radborn, where Sir John Chandos knight, Lord of the place, laid a goodly foundation of a great and stately house: from whom by a daughter it came by hereditary succession unto the Poles, who dwell heere at this day. But these particularities I leave for him who hath undertaken the full description of this Shire. But upon Trent, Repton. so soon as ever he hath taken to him the river Dove, is Repandunum to bee seene, for so doe our History-writers call it, the Saxons named it , and we at this day Repton, which from a great and faire Towne is become a poore small Village. For, in old time very famous it was, by reason both of the buriall of Aethelbald that good King of the Mercians, who through the treachery of his owne people lost his life, and of the other Kings of Mercia: as also for the unfortunate calamity of Burthred the last King of the Mercians, King Burthred. who when hee had enjoyed his kingdome partly by way of entreaty and partly by meanes of bribery, full twenty yeeres, was heere deprived of his kingdome by the Danes, or rather freed and ex∣empted from the glittering misery of princely State, and so became an example to teach men in how ticklish and slippery a place they stand which are underpropped onely with money. Melborn. Then not farre from Trent is Melborn a Castle of the Kings now decaying, wherein John Duke of Burbon taken prisoner in the battaile of Agin∣court was detained nineteene yeeres under the custody of Sir Nicholas Montgomery the younger. Scarce five miles hence Northward, the River Derwent hath his walke; who in the utmost limit, as I said before, of this Shire Northward deriving his head out of the Peak hils, being one while streitned betweene crags, and sometimes ano∣ther while watering and cherishing the fresh greene medowes, by mossie and morish grounds holdeth on his course for thirty miles or thereabout directly, as it were, into the South. Howbeit in so long a course hee passeth by nothing worth looking on, Chattesworth. except Chattesworth, a very large, faire and stately house, which Sir Wil∣liam Candish, Cavendish. or Cavendish descended out of that ancient house of Gernon in Suffolke, beganne, and which his Wife Elizabeth, and after Countesse of Shrewesbury, hath of late with great charges fully finished. But where Derwent turneth somewhat Eastward, when it is once past Little Che∣ster, that is, Little City, where old peeces of Roman money are often times gotten out of the ground, Darby sheweth it selfe, in the English-Saxon Tongue named , and by the Danes (as Athelward that ancient Writer witnesseth) Deoraby, the chiefe Towne of all this Shire: which name, being taken from the River Derwent and contracted from Derwentby, it hath bestowed upon the whole Coun∣ty. A proper Towne it is, none of the least, not without good trade and resort unto it. On the East side of it, the River Derwent making a very faire shew, runneth downe carrying a full and lofty streame under a beautifull stone Bridge, upon which our devout forefathers erected a faire Chappell, which now is neglected and goeth to decay: Through the South part thereof runneth a prety cleere Riveret which they call Mertenbrooke. Five Churches there be in it: Of which the greatest named All Hallowes, dedicated to the memory of All-Saints, hath a Towre Steeple that for height and singular fine Workemanship excelleth. In which Church, the Countesse of Shrewesbury, of whom erewhile I spake, trusting her selfe better than her heires, providently erected a Sepulture for her selfe, and as religiously founded an Hospitall hard by, for the maintenance of twelve poore folke, eight men and foure women. Memorable in old time was this place, because it had beene a lurking hole and a Rendevous for the Danes, untill Ethelfleda that victorious Lady of the Mercians, by a suddaine forceable surprise, made a slaughter of the Danes and became Mistresse of it. In the time of King Edward the Confessour, as wee finde in Domesday booke, it had 143. Burgesses, whose number notwithstanding decreased so, that in William the Conquerours Raigne there remained onely an hundred: And these paid unto the King at the feast of Saint Martin 12. Thraves of corne, as it should seeme. Trabes of Corne. But now all the name and credit that it hath, ariseth of the Assisses there kept for the whole shire, and by the best appy ale, that is brewed there: a drinke so called, of the Danish word Oela somewhat wrested, and not of Alica, Ale. Cervisia in la∣tine, Curmi in Dioscorides: Ale in English, of Oel, a Da∣nish word. as Ruellius deriveth it: the Britans termed it by an old word Kwrw, in steade whereof Curmi is read amisse in Dioscorides ; where hee saith, that the Hiberi (perchance he would have said Hiberni, that is, The Irishmen ) in lieu of wine use Cur∣mi, a kinde of drinke made of Barly. For, this is that Barly-wine of ours, which Julian the Emperour, that Apostata, calleth merrily in an Epigramme, . This is the ancient and peculiar drinke of the Englishmen and Britans, yea and the same very wholsome, howsoever Henry of Aurenches the Norman, Arch-poet to King Henry the Third, did in his pleasant wit merrily jest upon it in these Verses, Nescio quod Stygiae monstrum conforme paludi, Cervisiam plerique vocant: nil spissius illa Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, unde Constat, quòd multas faeces in ventre relinquit. Of this strange drinke, so like to Stygian lake, (Most tearme it Ale) I wote not what to make: Folke drinke it thicke, and pisse it passing thin, Much dregges therefore must needs remaine within. Howbeit, Turnebus de Vino. Turnebus that most learned Frenchman maketh no doubt, but that men using to drinke heereof, if they could avoid surfetting, would live longer than those that drinke wine: and that from hence it is, that many of us drinking Ale live an hun∣dred yeeres. And yet Asclepiades in Plutarch ascribeth this long life to the coldnesse of the aire, which keepeth in and preserveth the naturall heat in bodies, when he made report, that the Britans lived untill they were an hundred and twenty yeeres old. But the wealth of this Towne consisteth much in buying of corne and selling it a∣gaine to the mountaines: for all the Inhabitants be as it were a kinde of hucksters, or badgers. Not farre from hence doth Derwent carry his streame, where by Elwaston Sir Raulph Montjoye had lands, Barons Montjoye. in the time of Edward the First: from whence came Sir Walter Blunt, whom King Edward the Fourth advanced to the honour of Baron Montjoye with a pension: whose posterity have equalled the nobility of their birth with the ornaments of learning: and principally among them, Charles, late Earle of De∣vonshire, Baron Montjoy, Lord Lieutenant Generall of Ireland, and Knight of the Order of the Garter. Beneath this Elwaston, Derwent disburdeneth himselfe into the chanell of Trent, which within a while admitteth into it the River Erewash, that in this part ser∣veth as a limit to divide this country from Nottingham-shire. Neere unto this River standeth Riseley, a possession of the Willoughbeies: of which family was that Sir Hugh Willoughby, as I have heard say, who whiles hee endevoured to discover the Frozen Sea neere unto Wardhous in Scandia, was frozen to death together with his company, in the same ship. Hard by it also is Sandiacre, or as others will have it, Sainct Diacre, the seat of the Family of the Greies of Sandiacre: Greies of Sandiacre. whose inheritance Sir Edward Hi∣lary in right of his wife was first possessed of; and whose sonne became adopted in∣to the name of the Greies: and a few yeeres after, the one of his daughters and heires wedded to Sir John Leake, and the other to John Welsh. On the East side of this Shire there follow in order Northward these places, Codenor Castle. Code∣nor in old time Coutenoure Castle, which belonged to the Barons Grey, called there∣upon Lords Grey of Codenor ; Barons Grey of Codenor. whose inheritance in the foregoing age came to the Zouches by the marriage that Sir John de la Zouch the second sonne of William Lord de la Zouch of Haringworth, contracted with Elizabeth the heire of Henry Grey the last Lord of Codenor. Then, Winfeld, a very great and goodly Manour, where Raulph Lord Cromwell in the Raigne of Henry the Sixth built a sumptuous and stately house, for those daies. Alfreton. After it, you see Alffreton, which men thinke to have beene built by King Alfred, and of him to have taken that name: which Towne had also Lords, en∣tituled therupon, de Alfreton: of whom the second named Robert, the sonne of Ra∣nulph, built in the most remote angle and nouke of this shire the little Abbay De Bel∣lo capite, commonly called Beau-chiefe ; but a few yeeres after for default of heires males the Family of Chaworth and the Lathams in Lancashire possessed their inheri∣tance, by two daughters. The Barons of Alfreton coat of Armes. Staveley. These bare for their Armes, Two Chevero s, as they tearme them, Or, in a Shield Azur: which very same Coat the Musards, that is, The doubters and delaiers who were called Barons of Staveley in this County, changing the colours one∣ly gave, who during the Raigne of King Edward the First had an end in Sir Nicholas Musard : Freshwell commonly. and his eldest sister was married to Ancher Freschevill, whose posterity flou∣risheth heere still at this day. Higher yet in the very East frontier of this County, up∣on a rough and a craggy Soile standeth Hardwic, which gave name to a Family in which possessed the same: out of which descended Lady Elizabeth Countesse of Shrewesbury, who beganne to build there two goodly houses joyning in manner one to the other, which by reason of their lofty situation shew themselves, a farre off to be seene, and yeeld a very goodly prospect. This now giveth the Title of Baron to Sir William Cavendish her second sonne, Baron Caven∣dish. whom King James of late hath honoured with the honour of Baron Cavendish of Hardwic. More inward in the Country, is seated Chester-field in Scardale, that is, in a Dale com∣passed in with cragges and rockes: For, such rockes the Englishmen were wont to tearme Scarres. Both the new name it selfe, and the ruines of the old Walles doe proove, that this Chester-field was of good antiquity: but the ancient name thereof is by continuance of time worne out and quite lost. King John made it a free Burrough when he gave it to William Briewer his especiall favourite. In Writers it is famous on∣ly by occasion of the warre betwixt King Henry the Third and his Barons, wherein Robert Ferrars the last Earle of Darby of that name, being taken prisoner and depri∣ved of his honour by authority of the Parliament, lived afterwards as a private man: and his posterity flourished with the Title onely of Barons. Hard to this Chester∣field Westward lyeth Walton, Walton. which from the Bretons came hereditarily by Loudham to the Foliambs men of great name in this Tract: Sutton. and Eastward Sutton, where the Leaks held a long time a worshipfull port, in Knights degree. A little from hence is Bolsover an ancient Castle, situate somewhat with the high∣est: which belonged to the Hastings Lords of Abergavenney, in right of exchange with King Henry the Third: who being altogether unwilling that the Earledome of Chester, unto whom this Castle had appertained, should bee divided and bestowed among distaves, assigned here and there other possessions unto the sisters of Iohn Scot the last Earle. The West part beyond Derwent, which throughout riseth high and peaketh up with hils and mountaines, whence in old time it was called in the old English tongue Peac-lond, The Peake. and is at this day, haply for that cause, named the Peake (for, that word a∣mong us signifieth to appeare aloft) is severed from Stafford-shire by the Dove a most swift and cleere River, of which I shall speake hereafter. This part although in some place it hath craggy, rough and bare scarres, and cragges; yet by reason that under the upper crust of the earth there is limestone which supplyeth a batling fruitfull slugh, or humour, there be in it greene grassie hils and vales, which bring forth full oates, and feed safely both droves of greater beasts, and also many flockes of sheepe: For, Wolves. there is no more danger now from Wolves which in times past were hurtfull and noisome to this Country; and for the chasing away and taking of which some there were that held lands heere at Wormehill, who thereupon were sirnamed Wolve-hunt, as appeareth plainely in the Records of the Kingdome: Inq. 2. Ed. 2. But so plentifull it is of lead, Lead. Brodaeus. that the Alchymists, who condemne the Planets as convict of some crime unto the metall mines, have upon a ridiculous errour written, that Saturne, whom they make the Lord and Dominatour of lead, is liberally affected to England, in granting lead; but displeased with France, to which he hath denied the same. And verily, I thinke that Pliny spake of this Country when hee said this, In Britaine in the very crust of the ground, without any deepe mining, is gotten so great store of lead, that there is a law expressely made of purpose, forbidding men to make more than to a certaine stint. For, in these mountaines, fertile lead stones are daily digged up in great aboun∣dance, which upon the hill tops lying open to the West winde, neere unto Creach and Workes-Worth (which heereupon tooke name of the lead-workes) when the Westerne winde beginnes to blow (which winde of all others they have by expe∣rience found to hold longest) they melt with mighty great fires of wood into lead, in troughes or trenches wich they digge of purpose for it to runne into, and so make it up into Sowes. Neither onely lead, but Stibium also called in the Apothecaries shops Antimonium, Antimony. is heere found by it selfe in veines: which minerall the women of Greece used in old time to colour their eye-browes with, whereupon the Poet Ion, in Greeke tearmeth it . Milstones. Milstones likewise are heere hewed out, as also grinde-stones and whetstones, Grindstones. Whetstones. Fluores. Chrystall. to give an edge unto iron tooles: and sometimes in these mines or quarries is found a certaine white Fluor (for such stones comming out of Mines, that be like unto precious stones, learned minerall men call Fluores ) which for all the world resembleth Christall. Besides Workes-worth, lately mentioned, we meet with never another place worth the remembrance, unlesse it be Haddon by the River Wie, the seat for many yeeres to∣gether of the Vernons, Vernon. who as they were very ancient so they became no lesse renow∣ned in these parts, in so much as Sir George Vernon knight, who lived in our time, for his magnificent port that hee carried, the open house that hee kept, and his commen∣dable hospitality, gat the name among the multitude of a Pety King in the Peake. By his Daughters and heires a goodly and great Inheritance was transferred unto Sir John Mannours sonne of Thomas Earle of Rutland, and to Sir Thomas Stanley sonne of Edward Earle of Darby. There adjoyneth unto this, Bakewell upon the same Riveret, which among these hils maketh it selfe way into Derwent. This was by the Saxons called : And Marianus writeth, that King Edward the El∣der erected there a Burrough. Now whether it borrowed this name or no of the hote waters, which the ancient Englishmen, as also the Germans in their language tearmed Bade and Baden, whence came Baden in Germany and Buda in Hungary, I know not. Certes, at the spring-head of Wie not farre from hence, there rise and walme up nine fountaines of hote waters, Buxton. the place at this day is called Buxton well: which being found by experience holsome for the stomach, sinewes, and the whole body, George Earle of Shrewesbury lately beautified with buildings, and so they are be∣gunne againe to bee resorted unto, by concourse of the greatest Gentlemen and of the Nobility. At which time that most unfortunate Lady, Mary Queene of Scots bad farewell unto Buxton with this Distichon, by a little change of Caesars Verses con∣cerning Feltria, in this wise: Buxtona a quae calidae celebrabere nomine lymphae, Fortè mihi posthac non adeunda, vale. Buxton, that of great name shalt be, for hote and holsome baine, Farewell, for I perhaps shall not thee ever see againe. But that these hote waters were knowne in old time, The Port-way or High paved Street named Bath-gate, reaching for seven miles together from hence unto Burgh a little Village doth manifestly shew. Neere unto this Burgh there standeth upon the top of an hill an old Castle sometimes belonging to the Peverels, called The Castle in the Peake, 46. Ed. 3. and in Latin De Alto Pecco, which King Edward the Third together with a Manour and an Honour, gave unto his sonne John Duke of Lancaster, what time as hee surrendered the Earledome of Richmond into the Kings hands. Under which, there is a Cave or hole within the ground, called, saving your reverence, The De∣vils Arse, Devils Arse in Peake. that gapeth with a wide mouth, and hath in it many turnings and rety∣ring roomes: wherein, forsooth, Gervase of Tilbury, whether for wane of knowing trueth, or upon a delight hee had in fabling, hath written, that a Shepheard saw a very wide and large Country with Riverets and Brookes running heere and there through it, and huge Pooles of dead and standing waters. Notwithstanding, by reason of these and such like fables, this Hole is reckoned for one of the wonders of England: neither are there wanting the like tales of another Cave, but especially of that which is called Elden Hole, Elden hole. wherein there is nothing to bee wondred at, but that it is of an huge widnesse, exceeding steepe, and of a mervailous depth. But whosoever have written that there should bee certaine tunnels and breathing holes, out of which windes doe issue, they are much deceived: Neither doe these Verses of Alexander Necham, which hee wrote as touching the Mervailes of England a∣gree to any of these two holes. Est specus Aeolijs ventis obnoxia semper, Impetus è gemino maximus ore venit. Cogitur injectum velamen adire supernas Partes, descensum impedit aura potens. A Cave, to strong Aeolian windes alwaies enthral'd there is, From two-fold tunnell maine great blasts arise and never misse, A cloth or garment cast therein, by force aloft is sent, A mighty breath, or powrfull puffe doth hinder all descent. But all the memorable matters in this high and rough stony little Country, one hath comprised in these foure Verses. Mira alto Pecco tria sunt, barathrum, specus, antrum; Commoda tot, plumbum, gramen, ovile pecus. Tot speciosa simul sunt, Castrum, Balnea, Chatsworth; Plura sed occurrunt, quae speciosa minùs. There are in High Peake Wonders three, A deepe Hole, Cave and Den: Commodities as many bee, Lead, Grasse, and Sheepe in pen. And Beauties three there are withall A Castle, Bath, Chatsworth: With places more yet meet you shall That are of meaner worth. * To these Wonders may be added a wonderfull Well in the Peake Forest not farre from Buxtons which ordinarily ebbeth and floweth foure times in the space of one houre or thereabout, A strange Well. Th. Fitz-Her∣bert. p. 223. Lords and Earles of Darby. Simon Du∣nelm. Hovenden. Matthew Paris. 204. keeping his just Tides: and I know not whether Tideswell a Mercate Towne heereby hath his name thereof. The Peverels who I have said before were Lords of Nottingham are also reported to have beene Lords of Darby. Afterward King Richard the First, gave and confir∣med unto his brother John the Counties and Castles of Nottingham, Lancaster, Darby, &c. with the honours thereto belonging, with the honour also of Peverell. After him these were Earles of Derby out of the family of Ferrars (so far as I am able to gather out of the Registers of Tutbury, Merivall, and Burton Monasteries ) William Ferrars, sonne to the Daughter and heire of Peverell, whom King John with his owne hand, (as we finde in an ancient Charter) invested Earle of Darby: Chart. antiq. 1. Ioban. William his sonne who bruised with a fall out of his Coach died in the yeere 1254. And this Williams sonne, Robert ; who in the Civill Warre lost this Title and a great estate by forfei∣ture, in such sort as that none of his posterity, although they lived in great port and reputation, were ever restored to that honor againe: But most of this Roberts posses∣sions K. Henry the Third passed over unto Edmund his owne younger son: and King Edward the Third (I write out of the very originall Record) by authority and advise of the Parliament, ordained Henry of Lancaster, the sonne of Henry Earle of Lan∣caster, Earle of Darby, to him and his heires, and withall assigned unto him a thou∣sand markes yeerely during the life of his father Henry Earle of Lancaster. From that time this Title was united to the line of Lancaster, untill King Henry the Se∣venth, bestowed the same upon Thomas Lord Stanley, who before had wedded Mar∣garet the Kings mother, to him and the heires males of his body. He had for his suc∣cessour his Grandsonne Thomas begotten by George his sonne of Ioan the heire of the Lord Strange of Knocking: this Thomas had by the sister of George Earle of Hunting∣don, Edward, the third Earle of this Family, highly commended for hospitality and affability, who by the Lady Dorothy Daughter to the first Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, begat Henry the fourth Earle, efts-once honourably employed, who left by Lady Margaret Daughter of Henry Earle of Cumberland, Ferdinand, and William successively Earles of Darby. Ferdinand dyed in strange manner, in the flower of his youth, leaving by Margaret his Wife Daughter of Sir John Spenser of Althorp three Daughters, Anne marryed to Grey Bruges, Lord Chandos, Francis Wife to Sir Iohn Egerton, and Elizabeth Wife to Henry Earle of Huntingdon. William the sixth Earle now enjoyeth that Honour having issue by Elizabeth Daughter to Edward late Earle of Oxford. ANd thus much of the Counties of Nottingham and Darby: of which they inhabited a part who in Bedes time were called Mercij Aquilonares, Northren Mercians. that is, The Northern Mercians, for that they dwelt beyond the Trent North∣ward: and they held, as hee saith, The land of seven thou∣sand Families. This County holdeth in it Parishes 106. CORNAVII. H Aving now travailed in order through the Countries of the ancient CORITANI, I am to survey the Regions con∣fining, which in ancient time the people called CORNA∣BII or CORNAVII, inhabited: The derivation or E∣tymologie of whose name let others sift out. As for my selfe, I could draw the force and signification of that word to this and that diversly; but seeing none of them doth aptly answere to the nature of the place, or disposition of the people, I chuse rather to reject them, than heere to propound them. According therefore to my purpose, I will severally runne over those Provinces which after Ptolomees descripti∣on the CORNAVII seeme to have possessed, that is to say, Warwick-shire, Worcester-shire, Stafford-shire, Shrop-shire and Cheshire. In which, there remaineth no footing at this day, of the name Cornavij, although this name continued even untill the declining State of the Romane Empire. For, certaine Companies and Regiments of the CORNAVII served in pay under the later Emperours, as wee may see in the Booke of Notitia Pro∣vinciarum. WARWICI Comitatus a cor: nauiis olim inha: bitatus WARWICK-SHIRE. T He County of WARVVICK, which the old English Sa∣xons as well as wee called WARVVICK-SHIRE, being bounded on the East side with Northampton-shire, Leicester∣shire, and the Watling-street Way, which I spake of: on the South with Oxford-shire and Glocestershire, on the West, for the greatest part with Worcester-shire, and on the North side with Stafford-shire, is divided into two parts, the Feldon and Woodland, that is, into a plaine Champian, and a woody Country: which parts, the River Avon running crookedly from North-East to South-West, doth after a sort sever one from the other. The Feldon, Feldon. lyeth on this side Avon Southward, a plaine Champian Countrey, and being rich in Corne and greene grasse, yeeldeth a right goodly and pleasant pro∣spect to them that looke downe upon it from an Hill which they call Edge-hill. Where this hill endeth nere unto Wormington, we saw a round Fort or military fense cast up of a good bignesse, which, as others of that kinde, wee may well thinke to have beene made for the present, and not long to continue, by occasion of some e∣nemies that in times past were ready to invade those parts. Of the redy Soile heere, come the names of Rodway and Rodley: The Vale of Redhorse. yea and a great part of the very Vale is there∣upon termed The Vale of Red-horse ▪ of the shape of an Horse cut out in a red hill by the Country people hard by Pillerton. In this part the places worth naming are Shipston and Kinton, Shipston in Worcester∣shire. Kinton. Compton. the one in times past a Mercate of Sheepe, the other of Kine, whereupon they gat those names: al∣so Compton in the Hole, so called for that it lyeth hidden in a Valley under the Hilles; yet hath it delights and pleasures about it, and from thence a noble Family hath taken the name: out of which the most excellent Prince Queene Elizabeth ad∣vanced Sir Henry Compton to the honour of a Baron in the yeere of our Redemp∣tion 1572. Likewise Wormeleighton, so highly commended, and notorious for good Sheepe-pasture, but now much more notable since that King James created that right worshipfull Sir Robert Spenser, of whom I have already spoken, Baron Spenser of Wormeleighton. Shugbury. Stones Astroites Sigstean. See in Lincoln∣shire. Leamington. Moreover, Shugbury, where the stones called Astroites, resembling little Starres, are found, which the Lords of the place sirnamed there∣upon Shugbury, have long shewed in their Coat Armour: Southam a Mercate Towne well knowne: as also Leamington (so called of Leame a small Brooke that wandereth through this part of the Shire) where there boyleth out a spring of salt water: and Utrhindon, now Long Ichingdon, and Harbury. Neither veri∣ly are these two places memorable for any other cause, but for that Fremund sonne to King Offa was betwixt them villanously in times past slaine by those that fore∣layed him, a man of great renowne and singular Piety to God ward, unto whom nothing else procured envie and evill will, but because in an unhappy time hee had by happy Conduct quelled the audacious Courage of his enemies. Which Death of his notwithstanding turned to his greater Glorie. For, beeing bury∣ed at his Fathers Palace, Off-Church. now called Off-Church, hee liveth yet unto Posterity, as who beeing raunged in the Catalogue of our Saints hath among the multi∣tude received Divine Honours: and whose life is by an ancient Writer set out in a good Poeme, out of which let it bee no offence to put downe these few Verses following touching the Murderer, who upon an ambitious desire of a Kingdome, slew him. Non spera s vivo Fremundo, regis honore, Optato se posse frui, molitur in ejus Immeritam tacitò mortem, gladióque profanus Irruit exerto servus, Dominí jacentis Tale nihil veritum saevo caput amput at ictu. Talis apud In some Co∣pies Radford. Wydford Fremendum palma coronat, Dum simul & sontes occîdit, & occidit insons. Past hope, whiles Fremund liv'd, to speed of wished regalty, All secret and unworthy meanes he plots to make him dye. With naked sword, prophane slave he, assaileth cowardly His Lord unwares, and as he lay beheads him cruelly. At Wydford thus Prince Fremund did this glorious crowne attaine, Whiles slaying guilty folke, at once, himselfe is guiltlesse slaine. Fosse way. Thus much of the Feldon, or Champion part, which, that ancient Fosse-way (a thing that would not bee overpassed) cutteth overthwart: the ridge whereof is seene in pastures lying now out of the way, neere unto Chesterton the habitation of that ancient Family of the Peitoes, Peito. out of which was that William Peito, a Fran∣ciscane Frier, whom Paul the Fourth, Pope of Rome, of stomach to worke Car∣dinall Pole displeasure (would you thinke these heavenly Wights were so wrath∣full) created, though in vaine, Cardinall and egate of England having recalled Cardinall Pole to Rome before, to bee accused and charged as suspected corrupt in Religion: But Queene Mary, albeit shee were most affectionately devoted to the Church of Rome, interposed or rather opposed her selfe so, that Peito was forbid∣den to enter into England, and the power Legantine left entire and whole to Car∣dinall Pole. Heere I wote not whether it would bee materiall to relate, how in the Raigne of Edward the Fourth certaine Writers in Bookes of purpose penned made complaint of Covetousnesse, Rosse and T.B. against the de∣stroyers of Villages. how that she having assembled heere about flockes of Sheepe as a puissant power of armed forces, besieged many Villages well peo∣pled, drave out the Husbandmen, wonne the said Villages, destroyed, rased, and depopulated them in such miserable sort heereabout, that one of the said Writers a learned man in those daies cryed out with the Poet in these termes. Quid facerent hostes capta crudeliùs urbe? What could more cruelly be done, By enemies, to Cities wonne? But nere unto the River Avon, where carrying as yet but a small streame he close∣ly entereth into this County, first offereth it selfe Rugby having a Mercat in it stan∣ding chiefely of a number of Butchers. Then Newenham Regis, that is, Kings New∣enham standing upon the other side of the River, Newenham Regis. Holsome Welles. where three fountaines walme out of the ground streined, as it should seeme, through a veine of Alum; the water where∣of carrying both colour and taste of milke, is reported to cure the stone: Certes, it procureth urine abundantly, greene wounds it quickly closeth up and healeth, be∣ing drunke with salt it looseth, and with sugar, bindeth the belly. After it, Bagginton, which had a Castle to it, and belonged sometime to the Bagottes, Bagginton. as noble a Family then, a most other. Within a little whereof standeth Stoneley, where King Henry the Second founded an Abbay; and just over against it stood in old time a Castle upon Avon called Stoneley-holme, Stoneley. Register of Stoneley Abbay. built in Holmeshull, which was destroyed when the flaming broiles of Danish Warres under king Canu∣tus caught hold of all England. Then runneth Avon unto the principall Towne of the whole Shire, which wee call Warwicke, Warwick. the Saxons , Ninnius and the Britans Caer Guarvic, and Caer Leon. All which names, considering they seeme to have sprung from Guarth a British word which signifieth a Garison, or from Legions, that were set in certaine places for Guard and defence thereof, have in some sort perswaded mee (although in these Etymologies I love rather to bee a Scepticke than a Criticke ) that this is the very Towne of Britaine, Praesidium. which the Romans called PRAESIDIUM, where, as wee finde in the Noticia, or Abstract of Provinces, the Captaine of the Dalmatian Horsemen abode under the command of Dux Britanniae. This Cohort or Band was enrolled out of Dalmatia ; and (to note thus much by the way) such was the provi∣dent wisedome and forecast of the Romans, that in all their Provinces they placed forraigne Souldiers in Garison, who by reason of their diversity as well of manners as of language from the naturall Inhabitants, could not joyne with them in any conspiracy: Florus lib. 4. c. ult. for (as hee writeth) Nations not inured to the bridle of bondage, easily o∣therwise start backe from the yoake imposed upon them. Heereupon it was that there ser∣ved in Britaine, Forreine Soul∣diers in Pro∣vinces. out of Africke the Moores ; out of Spaine the Astures and Vettones ; out of Germany the Batavi, Nervij, Tungri, and Turnacenses ; out of Gaul the Lin∣gones, Morini ; and from other remoter places, Dalmatians, Thracians, Alani, &c. as I will shew in their proper places: But now to the matter. Neither let any man thinke that the Britans got that word Guarth from the Frenchmen, seeing the originall is an Hebrew word (if wee may beleeve Lazius ) and in that Originall most Nations doe accord. But that this was PRAESIDIUM, that is, The Garison Towne, both the Authori∣ty of our Chronicles teacheth, which report that the Romane Legions had their a∣boad heere▪ and the site also it selfe in the very navell and mids almost of the whole Province doth imply. For equally distant it is of the one side from the East Coast of Norfolke, and on the other side from the West of Wales, which kinde of situation PRAESIDIUM a Towne of Corsica, had, standing just in the middest of the Island. And no marvaile is it that the Romans kept heere Garison and a standing Company of Souldiers, seeing it standeth over the River Avon upon a steepe and high Rocke, and all the passages into it are wrought out of the very stone. That it was fortified with a Wall and Ditches it is apparent; and toward the South West it sheweth a Castle passing strong, as well by Nature as handy-worke, the seat in times past of the Earles of Warwicke. The Towne it selfe is adorned with faire houses, and is much bound to Ethelfled, Lady of the Mercians, who repaired it (when as it was greatly decaied) in the yeere 911. In very good state also it was upon the Nor∣mans entring into this land, and had many Burgesses, as they tearme them: and twelve of them, as wee finde written in King William the Conquerours Domesday Booke, Were bound to accompany the King of England into his Warres. He that upon warning given went not, paid an hundred Shillings to the King: but if the King made a voyage by sea against his enemies, they sent either foure Boteswans, or foure pound of Deniers. In this Burgh the King hath in his Demeines one hundred and thirteene Burgesses, and the Kings Ba∣rons have an hundred and twelve. Roger the second, of the Normans bloud, Earle of Warwicke, built afterwards in the very heart of the Towne a most beautifull Church to the blessed Virgin Mary: Which the Beauchamps that succeeded ador∣ned with their Tombes: but especially Richard Beauchamp, Earle of Warwicke, and Governour of Normandy, who dyed at Roan in the yeere 1439. and after a sumptuous funerall solemnized, in this Church lyeth entombed in a magnificent Tombe with this Inscription. Pray devoutly for the soule whom God assoile of one of the most worshipfull Knights in his daies of Manhood and cunning, Richard Beauchampe late Earle of Warwicke, Lord De∣spenser, of Bergavenny, and of many other great Lordships, whose body resteth heere under this Tombe, in a full faire Vault of stone, set in the bare Roche. The which visited with long sicknesse in the Castle of Rohan, therein deceased full Christianly the last day of April, in the yeere of our Lord God 1439. Hee being at that time Lieutenant Generall of France, and of the Dutchie of Normandie, by sufficient au∣thority of our Soveraigne Lord King Henry the sixth. The which body by great deliberation and worshipfull conduct by sea and land, was brought to Warwick the fourth of October, the yeere abovesaid, and was laid with full solemne exequies in a faire Chest made of stone in the West Doore of this Chap∣pell, according to his last Will and Testament, therein to rest till this Chappell by him devised in his life were made: the which Chappell founded on the Roche, and all the members thereof his Executors did fully make and apparell, by the au∣thority of his said last Will and Testament. And thereafter by the said authority they did translate worshipfully the said body into the Vault aforesaid. Honoured be God therefore. Blacklow hill, which others call Gavers∣den. Neere unto Warwicke Northward is Blaclow hill to be seene, on which Piers de Ga∣veston, whom King Edward the Second had raised from a base and low estate to bee Earle of Cornwall, was by the Nobles of the Kingdome beheaded: who presuming of the Kings favor and fortunes indulgence, tooke unto him so great and licencious liberty, that when he had once corrupted the Kings heart, hee despised all the best men, and proudly seized upon the estates of many, and as hee was a crafty and old beaten Fox sowed discords and variance betweene the Prince and the Peeres of the Realme. Guy-cliffe. Under this hill, hard by the River Avon standeth Guy-cliffe, others call it Gib-cliffe, the dwelling house at this day of Sir Thomas Beau-foe descended from the ancient Normans line, and the very seat it selfe of pleasantnesse. There have yee a shady lit∣tle Wood, cleere and cristall Springs, mossie bottomes and caves, medowes alwaies fresh and greene, the River rumbling heere and there among the stones with his streame making a milde noise and gentle whispering, and besides all this, solitary and still quietnesse, things most gratefull to the Muses. Heere, as the report goes, that valiant knight and noble Worthy so much celebrated, Sir Guy of Warwicke, after hee had borne the brunt of sundry troubles, J. Rosse of Warwick. Guy of War∣wick. and atchieved many painfull ex∣ploits, built a Chappell, led an Eremits life, and in the end was buryed. Howbeit, wiser men doe thinke, that the place tooke that name of later time by farre, from Guy Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke ; and certaine it is, that Richard Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke built Saint Margarets Chappell heere, and erected a mighty and giantlike sta∣tue of stone, resembling the said Guy. Charle-cot. Avon now runneth downe from Warwicke with a fuller streame by Charle-cot, the habitation of the renowned ancient family of the Lucies knights, which place long agoe descended hereditarily to them from the Charlecots: who upon a pious and de∣vout minde founded a religious House at Thellisford, for entertainment of poore folke and Pilgrims: For, that little River was called Thelley, which by Compton Mur∣dacke, the possession sometime of the Murdackes, and now of the Vernaies, Knights, and by this, Stratford upon Avon. Thellisford goeth into Avon, which within a while runneth hard by Strat∣ford, a proper little mercate towne, beholden for all the beauty that it hath to two men there bred and brought up, namely, John of Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, who built the Church; and Sir Hugh Clopton Major of London, who over Avon made a stone Bridge supported with foureteene Arches, not without exceeding great expenses. This Hugh was a younger brother, out of that ancient family which from Clopton a Manour adjoyning borrowed this sirname, since the time that Walter de Cocksfeld called Knight Mareschall setled and planted both himselfe and his successours at Clopton. The inheritance of these Cloptons is in our time descended to two sisters coheires: the one of which is married to Sir George Carew knight, Vice chamberlaine to our most gracious Lady Queen Anne: Baron Carew of Clopton. whom King James hath entituled Baron Ca∣rew of Clopton, and whom I am the more willing to name with honour in this respect, if there were none other, for that hee is a most affectionate lover of venerable anti∣quity. Neither seeth Avon any other memorable thing upon his bankes, but Bitford a Mercate Towne, and some Country Villages being now ready to enter into Wor∣cester-shire. Now let us enter into the Woodland, Woodland. which beyond the River Avon spreadeth it selfe Northward much larger in compasse than the Feldon: and is for the most part thicke set with Woods, and yet not without pastures, corne fields, and sundry mines of Iron: This part, as it is at this day called Woodland, so also it was in old time knowne by a more ancient name Arden, but in the selfesame sense and signification, as I thinke. For, Arden. it seemeth that Arden among the ancient Britans and Gaules signified a Wood ; considering that we see a very great Wood in France named ARDEN, a Towne in Flanders hard by another Wood, called Ardenburg, and that famous Wood or Forest in England by a clipped word likewise cleped DEN: Diana Ard∣wena. to say nothing of that DIANA, which in the ancient inscriptions of Gaule is sirnamed ARDVVENA and ARDOI∣NA, that is, if I doe not mis-conceive, Of the Wood ; and was the same Diana which in the inscriptions of Italy went under the name of NEMORENSIS. Of this Fo∣rest, Turkill of Arden, who flourished heere in all honour under King Henry the First, tooke his name: and his offspring which was of great worship and reputation, spred very much over all England for many yeeres successively ensuing. In the West side of this Country, the River Arrow maketh haste to joyne himselfe in society with Avon, Studly. by Studly Castle ; belonging sometime to John the sonne of Corbutio. But whe∣ther this River Arrow tooke name of swiftnesse, as Tigris in Mesopotamia (for Arrow with us, like as Tigris among the Persians, betokeneth a shaft) or contrariwise, of the still streame and slow course, which Ar in the old French and British Tongue im∣plied, let other men looke who have better observed the nature of this River. Upon this River standeth Coughton, Coughton. Throckmorton the principall mansion house of the Throckmor∣tons a family of Knights degree, which being spred into a number of faire branches, and fruitfull of fine wits, flourished in this tract especially, ever since they matched in marriage with the daughter and heire of Speney. Ousley. Not farre from hence is Ousley, which also was in ancient time well knowne by the Lords thereof, the Butlers, Ba∣rons of Wem ; from whom it was devolved hereditarily to the Ferrars of Ousley. Whose inheritance, within a short time, was divided betweene John Lord of Greistocke and Sir Raulph Nevill. Beauchamps Court. Beneath it, upon Arrow, standeth Beauchamps-Court so named of Baron Beauchamp of Powicke, from whom by the onely daughter of Edward Willough∣bey, sonne to Robert Willoughbey Baron Broke, Grevills. it came to Sir Foulque Grevill a right worshipfull person both for his Knights degree, and for kinde courtesie: whose only sonne, carrying likewise the same name, hath consecrated himselfe so to true Vertue and Nobility, that in nobility of minde he farre surmounteth his parentage and unto whom for his exceeding great deserts toward me, although my heart is not able ei∣ther to expresse or render condigne thankfulnesse, yet in speech will I ever render thankes, and in silence acknowledge my selfe most deepely endebted. Under this Towne there runneth into Arrow, the River Al e, which holding on his course through the woods, Henley. passeth under Henley a prety mercate towne; a Castle joy∣ning whereunto belonged the Family of the Mont-forts, being Noblemen of great name, which for the pleasant situation among the Woods they called by a French name Bell-desert, but this together with the ruines is now buried quite and scant to be seene at all. These were descended not from the Almarian Family of the Mont-sorts of France, but from Turstan de Bastanberg a Norman: whose inheritance passed away at length by the daughters unto the Barons of Sudley, and to the Frevills. In the very place where Arrow and this Alne doe meete together, Aulcester. we saw Aulcester, by Matthew Paris called (and that more rightly) Allencester, which the inhabitants affirme to have beene a most famous and ancient Towne, and thereupon they will have the name to be Ouldcester. This, (as we reade in an old Inquisition) was a Frank-burogh of our Lord King Henry the First, and the same King gave that Burogh to Robert Corbet for his ser∣vice, and when the said Robert died, it came by descent to Sir William of Botereux, and to Sir Peter Fitz-Herbert: A booke in the Exchequer. and when William of Botereux dyed, the moity of that Burogh fell by descent into the hand of Sir Reginald of Botereux as to the heire, who now holdeth it: and when Peter Fitz-Herbert died, that moity descended into the hand of Herbert, the sonne of Peter: which Herbert gave it to Sir Robert de Chaundoys: But now it is decaied and of a very great Towne become a small Mercate of wares and trade. Howbeit exceeding much frequented for the Corne Faire there holden. This hath for a neere neighbour Arrow according to the name of the River, Arrow. Burdet. whose Lord Thomas Burdet for his de∣pendance upon George Duke of Clarence, words unadvisedly uttered, and hardly con∣strued through the iniquity of the time, lost his life. But by his grand daughter mar∣ried to Edward Conway brother to Sir Hugh Conway of Wales a gracious favourite of King Henry the Seventh, the knightly Family of the Conwaies have ever since flou∣rished and laudably followed the profession of Armes. But East from the river, and higher among the Woods, which now begin to grow thin, Wroxhall. Badesley. Balshall. Register of the Templars, and Order of Saint John of Jeru∣salem. stand these townes under named, Wroxhall, where Hugh de Hatton founded a little Priory; Badesley belonging in times past to the Clintons, now to the Ferrars: Also Balshall, sometimes a Commandery of the Templars, which Roger de Mowbray gave unto them; whose liberality to the order of Templars was so great, that by a common consent in their Chapiter they made a decree, that himselfe might remit and pardon, any of the brotherhood whomsoever, in case hee had trespassed against the statutes and ordinances of that Order, and did withall before him acknowledge the crime: yea and the Knights of the Order of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, unto whom the Tem∣plars possessions in England were assigned over (for our Ancestours in those daies held it a deadly sinne to prophane things consecrated to God) granted in token of thankfulnesse unto Iohn Mowbray of Axholme, See the Statute of Templars. the successour of the foresaid Roger, that himselfe and his successours in every of their Covents and assemblies should be received and entertained alwaies in the second place next unto the King. More North-east, where wilde Brookes meeting together make a broad poole a∣mong the Parkes, and so soone as they are kept in with bankes runne in a Chanell, is seated Kenelworth, Kenelworth commonly Killingworth. in times past commonly called Kenelworde, but corruptly Killing∣worth: and of it taketh name a most ample, beautifull and strong Castle, encompas∣sed all about with Parkes, which neither Kenulph, nor Kenelm, ne yet Keneglise built, as some doe dreame, but Geffrey Clinton Chamberlaine unto King Henry the First, and his sonne with him (as may be shewed by good evidences) when he had founded there before a Church for Chanons Regular. But Henry his Nephew in the second de∣gree, having no issue, sold it unto King Henry the Third, who gave it in franke marri∣age to Simon Montfort Earle of Leicester together with his sister Aeleonor. And soone after when enmity was kindled betweene the King and Earle Simon: and hee slaine in the bloody warres which he had raised upon faire pretexts against his Sove∣raigne, it endured six moneths fiege, and in the end was surrendred up to the king afore∣said, who annexed this Castle as an inheritance to Edmund his sonne Earle of Lan∣caster. At which time, there went out and was proclaimed from hence an Edict, which our Lawyers use to call Dictum de Kenelworth, whereby it was enacted, That whosoever had tooke Armes against the King should pay every one of them five yeeres rent of their lands, &c. A severe, yet a good and wholsome course, without effusion of bloud a∣gainst rebellious subjects, who compassing the destruction of the State, built all their hopes upon nothing else but dissentions. But this Castle through the bountifull mu∣nificence of Queene Elizabeth, was given and granted to Robert Dudleie Earle of Lei∣cester, who, to repaire and adorne it, spared for no coste: in so much as if a man con∣sider either the gallant building, or the large Parkes, it would scorne (as it were) to be ranged in a third place amongst the Castles in England. Next after this, to keepe on the journey that my selfe made, I saw Solyhill: but in it, Bremicham. setting aside the Church, there is nothing worth sight: Then, Bremicham, full of Inhabitants, and resounding with hammers and anvils, for the most of them are Smiths. The lower part thereof standeth very waterish: the upper riseth with faire buildings: for the credite and praise whereof, I may not reckon this in the last place, that the Noble and martiall Family of the Or Birmnig∣hams. Bremichams Earles of Louth, &c. in Ire∣land fetched their originall and name from hence. Then, in the utmost skirt of this Shire North-westward, Sutton Colfield standing in a woody and on a churlish hard Soile, glorieth of John Voisy Bishop of Excester there borne and bred: who in the Raigne of king Henry the Eighth, when this little Towne had lien a great while as dead, raised it up againe with buildings, priviledges, and a Grammar Schoole. As I went downe from hence Southward I came to Coleshull, a Towne sometime of the Clintons, and to Maxstocke Castle neighbouring to it, which acknowledged by a continuall line of hereditary succession for his Lords, the Limseies, who were also Lords of Wolverley, the Odingsells that came out of Flanders, and the Clitons, men of greatest worth and worship in their times. Lower yet, in the mids of this Woodland standeth Coventrey so called, as we take it, of a Covent of Monkes, considering that we terme in our tongue such a brotherhood, a Covent and Coven: Honoriu 3. cap. 14. Decret. and it is oftentimes in our Histories and Pontificall Decrees na∣med Coventria: as for example in this one passage: The Bishop of Coventrey is either beside himselfe, or seemeth to have rejected know∣ledge and lear∣ning, too too much. Vel non est compos sui Episcopus Con∣ventrensis, vel nimis videtur à se scientiam repulisse. Yet there be, that would have this name to be taken from that little Brooke that runneth within the City at this day called Shirburn, and in an ancient Charter of the Priory, is written Cuentford. Well, whence so ever it was so called, in the foregoing age, growing wealthy by clothing and making of Caps, it was the onely Mart and City of trade in all these parts, frequented also and peopled more than ordinarily a midland place: as being a City very commodiously seated, large, sweet, and neat, fortified with strong Walles, and set out with right goodly houses: among which there rise up on high two Churches of rare workmanship, standing one hard by the other, and matched, as it were, as concur∣rents, the one consecrated to the Holy Trinity, the other to Saint Michael. Yet hath it nothing within it, that one would say is of great antiquity. And the most ancient monument of all, as it may seeme, was the Monastery or Priory, the ruines whereof I saw neere unto those Churches: which Priory king Canutus founded first for religi∣ous Nunnes, who when they were within a while after throwne out, in the yeere 1043 Leofricke Earle of the Of middle England. Mercians enlarged, and in manner built anew, with so great a shew and bravery of gold and silver (these be the very words of William Malmesbury) that the wals seemed too narrow for to receive the treasure of the Church, and the coste bestowed there was wonderfull to as many as beheld it: for, out of one beame were scraped 50. Markes of sil∣ver. And he endowed it with so great livings, that Robert de Limseie, Bishop of Lich∣field and Chester translated his See hither, as it were to the golden sand of Lydia: to the end (for so writeth the said Malmesbury) that out of the very treasure of the Church hee might by stealth convey, wherewith to fill the Kings hand, wherewith to avoid the Popes businesse, and wherewith to satisfie the greedinesse of the Romanists. But this See, few yeeres after was removed againe to Lichfield: yet so, as that one and the selfe same Bishop, carried the name both of Lichfield and of Coventry: The first Lord of this City, so farre as I can learne, Lords of Coventry. 1050. Florilegus. was this Leofricke, who being very much offended and angry with the Citizens, oppressed them with most heavie tributes, which he would remit upon no other condition, at the earnest suite of his wife Godiva, unlesse she would herselfe ride on horse-backe naked through the greatest and most inhabited street of the Ci∣ty: which she did in deed, and was so covered with her faire long haire, that (if we may beleeve the common sort) shee was seene of no body, and thus shee did set free her Citizens of Coventry from many payments for ever. From Leofricke it came into the hands of the Earles of Chester, by Lucie his sonne Algars daughter: for, shee had beene married to Ranulph the first of that name, and the third Earle of Chester out of this line: who granted unto Coventrey the same liberties that Lincolne had, and gave a great part of the City unto the Monkes: the rest and Chilmore, which is the Lords Manour hard by the City, hee reserved to himselfe and to his heires. After whose death, when for want of issue male, the inheritance was divided betweene the sisters, Coventry came at length mediately by the Earles of Arundell unto Roger Mont-hault, whose grand sonne Robert, passed over all his right, for default of issue male of his body begotten, unto Queene Isabel mother to King Edward the Third: To have and to hold du∣ring the whole life of the Queene herselfe, and after her decease to remaine unto Iohn of El∣tham the said Kings brother, and to the heires of his body begotten, and for default, the re∣mainder to Edward King of England &c. For thus is it to be seene in the Fine, in the se∣cond yeere of King Edward the Third. Now, the said John of Eltham was afterwards created Earle of Cornwall, and this place became annexed to the Earldome of Corn∣wall. From which time it hath flourished in great state: Kings have bestowed sundry immunities upon it, and King Edward the Third especially, who permitted them to chuse a Major and two Bailiffes, and to build and embattle a Wall about it: also king Henry the Sixth, who laying unto it certaine small Townes adjoyning, granted, That it should bee an entire County corporate by it selfe, (the very words of the Charter runne in that sort) in deed and name, and distinct from the County of Warwicke. At which time in lieu of Bailiffes he ordained two Sheriffes, and the Citizens beganne to fortifie their City with a most strong Wall: wherein are beautifull Gates: and at one of them called Gosford Gate, there hangeth to bee seene a mighty great Shield bone of a wilde Bore, which any man would thinke that either Guy of Warwicke or else Diana of the Forest ( Arden ) slew in hunting, when he had turned up with his snout that great pit or pond, which at this day is called Swansewell, but Swinsewell in times past, as the au∣thority of ancient Charters doe proove. As touching the Longitude of this City, it is 25. Degrees, and 52. Scruples: and for the Latitude it is 52. Degrees, and 25. Scruples. Thus much of Coventrey: yet have you not all this of me, but (willingly to acknowledge by whom I have profited) of Henry Ferrars of Baddesley, a man both for parentage, and for knowledge of anti∣quity very commendable; and my especiall friend: who both in this place and al∣so elsewhere hath at all times courteously shewed me the right way when I was out, and from his candle, as it were, hath lightned mine. Ausley. Brand. Neere unto Coventrey North-west ward are placed Ausley Castle the habitation in times past of the Hastings, who were Lords of Abergavenney: and Brand, the dwel∣ling place in old time of the Verdons: Eastward standeth Caloughdon, commonly Ca∣ledon ; the ancient seat of the Lords Segrave, Caledon. Barons Segrave. from whom it descended to the Barons of Berkley, by one of the daughters of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke. These Segraves since the time that Stephen was Lord chiefe Justice of England, flourished in the hono∣rable estate of Barons, became possessed of the Chaucombes Inheritance, whose Armes also they bare, Segraves Coat of Armes. viz. A Lion rampant, Argent crowned, Or, in a Shield Sable. But John the last of them married Margaret Dutchesse of Northfolke, Daughter of Tho∣mas Brotherton; and begat Elizabeth a daughter, who brought into the Family of the Mowbraies the Dignity of Marshall of England, and Title of Duke of Norfolke. Brinkl also is not farre from hence, where stood an ancient Castle of the Mowbraies, to which many possessions and faire lands thereabout belonged: Brinklo Castle. But the very rubbish of this Castle time hath quite consumed; Combe Ab∣bay. as Combe Abbay is scant now apparent which the Camvills and Mowbraies endowed with possessions, and out of the ru∣ines and reliques whereof, a faire house of the Lord Haringtons in this very place is now raised. As you goe East-ward, you meet anon with Cester-Over, whereof I spake incidently before, belonging to the Grevills: neere unto which the High port-way Watling-street, dividing this shire Northward from Leicester-shire, runneth on forward by High-crosse, whereof also I have already written, neere unto Nun-Eaton, which in ancient time was named Eaton. But when Amice wife to Robert Bossu Earle of Leicester, as Henry Knighton writeth, had founded a Monastery of Nunnes, wherein her selfe also became professed, it began of those Nunnes to be called Nun-Eaton. And famous it was in the former ages by reason of those religious Vir∣gines holinesse, who devoting themselves continually to prayers, gave example of good life. A little from this there flourished sometimes Astley-Castle, Astley, or Estley. Baron Astley. the principall seate of the Familie of Astley out of which flourished Barons in the time of King Ed∣ward the First, Second, and Third: the heire whereof in the end was the second wedded Wife of Reginald Lord Grey of Ruthin ; from whom came the Greies Mar∣quesses of Dorset: some of whom were enterred in a most fine and faire Col∣legiat Church which Thomas Lord Astley founded with a Deane and Secular Chanons. Somewhat higher, Mand esse∣dum. Mancester. hard by Watling street (for so with the common people wee call the High-way made by the Romanes) where as the riuer Anker hath a stone bridge over it, stood MANDVESSEDUM a very ancient towne, mentioned by Antonine the Emperour, which being not altogether deprived of that name, is now called Mancester, and in Ninnius his Catalogue Caer Mancegued. Which name, considering there is a stone-quarry hard by, I may ghesse was imposed upon it, of the stones digged forth and hewed out of it. For, out of the Glossaries of the British tongue, we finde, that Main in the British language signified a Stone, and Fosswad in the Provinciall tongue to digge out: which being joyned together, may seeme ve∣ry expressely to import that ancient name MANDVESSEDUM. But what, how great, or how faire soever it hath been in old time, a very small village it is at this day, containing in it scarce foureteene dwelling houses, and those but little ones, and hath no monument of antiquitie to shew, beside an ancient mount which they call Old-burie. For on the one side, Atherstone a mercate towne of good re∣sort, where there stood a Church of Augustine Friers, now turned into a Chappell (which neverthelesse acknowledgeth Mancester Church for her mother) and Nun-Eaton on the other side, by their vicinity have left it bare and empty. Close unto Atherstone standeth Mery-Vale, Merivall. where Robert Ferrars erected a Monastery to God and the blessed Virgin Mary, wherein himselfe enwrapped in an Oxe-hide for a shrouding sheet was interred. Beyond these, Pollesworth. Northeastward is Pollesworth, where Modwena an Irish Virgin, of whom there went so great a fame for her holy life, built a religious house for Nuns, which R. Marmion a Noble man repaired, who had his Castle hard by at Stipper∣shull. Neere unto this place also there flourished in the Saxons daies, a towne that now is almost quite gone, Seckinton. called then SECANDUNUM, and at this day Sec∣kinton ; where Aethelbald King of the Mercians in civill warre about the yeere of our Lord 749. was stabbed to death by Beared: and soone after Offa slew Beared, so that as by bloudy meanes he invaded the Kingdome of Mercia, he likewise lost the same suddainely. It remaineth now that we reckon up the Earles of Warwick: Earles of Warwick. for, to passe over Guare, Morind, Guy of Warwick, of whose actes all England resoundeth, and others of that stampe, whom pregnant wits have at one birth bred and brought forth into the world: Henry the sonne of Roger de Beau-mont, and brother to Robert Earle of Mellent, was the first Earle descended of Normans bloud: who had married Mar∣garet the daughter of Ernulph de Hesdin Earle of Perch, a most mighty and puissant man. Out of this Family, there bare this Honourable title, Roger the sonne of Henry, William the sonne of Roger, who died in the thirtieth yeere of King Henry the Se∣cond, Walleran his brother, Henry the sonne of Walleran, Thomas his sonne, who de∣ceased without issue in the sixe and twentieth yeere of King Henry the Third, lea∣ving behinde him Margery his sister, Placita E. 3. Rotulo 234. who being Countesse of Warwicke, and bar∣raine, departed this life: yet her two husbands, first, Iohn Mareschal, then John de Plessetis or Plessey, in their wives right and through their Princes favour mounted up to the Honourable dignitie of Earles of Warwicke. Now when these were departed without any issue by that Margery, Waller and Uncle unto the said Margery succeeded them: After whom, dying also childlesse, his sister Alice enjoyed the inheritance: Afterwards her sonne William, called Mal∣duit and Manduit of Hanslap, who left this world and had no children. Then Isabell the said William Malduits sister being bestowed in marriage upon William de Beau∣champ Lord of Elmesly, brought the Earledome of Warwicke into the Familie of the Beauchamps ; who, if I deceive not my selfe, for that they came of a daughter of Ursus de Abtot, Rot. Parl. 23. H. 6. gave the Beare for their cognisance, and left it to their posteritie. Out of this house there flourished sixe Earles and one Duke: William the sonne of Isabell, John, Guy, Thomas, Thomas the younger, Richard and Henry, unto whom King Henry the Sixth graunted this preheminence and prerogative without any prece∣dent, to be the first and chiefe Earle of England, and to carry this stile, Henricus Praecomes totius Anglia, & Comes Warwici, that is, Henry chiefe Earle of all England, and Earle of Warwicke: he nominated him also King of the Isle of Wight, and after∣wards created him Duke of Warwicke, and by these expresse words of his Parent, graunted, 24. H. 6. That he should take his place in Parliaments and elsewhere next unto the Duke of Norfolke and before the Duke of Buckingham. One onely daughter he had named Anne, whom in the Inquisitions wee finde entituled Countesse of Warwicke, and shee died a child. After her succeeded Richard Nevill who had married Anne sister to the said Duke of Warwicke, a man of an undaunted courage, but wavering and untrustie, the very tennisse-ball, in some sort, of fortune; who although he were no King, was above Kings, as who deposed King Henry the Sixth (a most bountifull Prince to him) from his regall dignitie, placed Edward the Fourth in the royall throne, and afterwards put him downe too, restored Henry the Sixth againe to the King∣dome, enwrapped England within the most wofull and lamentable flames of civill warre, which himselfe at the length hardly quenched with his owne bloud. After his death Anne his Wife by Act of Parliament was excluded and debarred from all her lands for ever, and his two daughters, heires to him, and heires apparant to their mother, Ann. 12. Ed. 4. Dead by Par∣liament. being married to George Duke of Clarence, and Richard Duke of Gloce∣ster, were enabled to enjoy all the said lands, in such wise as if the said Anne their mother were naturally dead. Whereupon the name, stile and title of Earle of War∣wicke and Sarisbury was graunted to George Duke of Clarence, who soone after was unnaturally dispatched by a sweet death in a Butte of Malvesey by his suspicious brother King Edward the Fourth: His young sonne Edward was stiled Earle of Warwicke, and being but a very child was beheaded by King Henry the Seventh to secure himselfe and his posteritie. Period of the civill warre be∣tweene Lanca∣ster and Yorke. The death of this Edward our Ancestors accounted to be the full period, and fi∣nall end of the long lasting warre betweene the two royall houses of Lancaster and Yorke. Wherein, as they reckoned, from the twenty eight yeere of Henry the Sixth unto this, being the fifteenth of Henry the Seventh, there were thirteene fields fought, three Kings of England, one Prince of Wales, twelve Dukes, one Marques, eighteene Earles, with one Vicont, and twenty three Barons, besides Knights and Gentlemen, lost their lives. From the death of this young Earle of Warwicke this title lay asleepe, which King Henry the Eighth feared as a fire-brand of the State, by reason of the combustion which that Richard Nevill, that whip-king (as some tearmed him) had raised, untill that King Edward the Sixth conferred it upon Iohn Dudley, that derived his pedigree from the Beauchamps, who, like unto that Richard abovesaid, going about in Queene Maries daies to turne and translate Scep∣ters at his pleasure, for his Traiterous deepe ambition lost his head. But his sonnes, first Iohn, when his father was now Duke of Northumberland, by a courteous custome usually received held this title for a while: and afterwards Ambrose a most worthy personage, both for warlike prowesse and sweetnesse of nature through the fauour of Queene Elizabeth received in our remembrance, the Honour of Earle of War∣wick to him and his heires males, and for defect of them, to Robert his brother, and the heires males of his body lawfully begotten. This Honour Ambrose bare with great commendation, and died without children in the yeere one thousand five hundred eighty nine, shortly af∣ter his brother Robert Earle of Leicester. In this County there be Parish Churches 158. WORCESTER-SHIRE. T He second region of the ancient CORNAVII, having now changed the name, is called in Latine Wigorniensis Comitatus, in the English Saxon tongue , and now commonly of the principall Towne in it WORCESTER∣SHIRE: the inhabitants whereof, together with those who joyning unto them round about in Bedes daies, before that England was divided into Shires, Wichij. were termed Wiccii. Which name, if it were not given them of the river having so many windings, which they dwell by (for such turnings and curving reaches of a river, the English Saxons, as I have already said, called Wic ) may seeme to have been derived of those Salt-pits, that the old English-men in their language named Wiches. Salt-pits. For there be here very notable Salt-pits, and many salt springs often times have been found, which notwithstanding are stopped up, because it was provided (as we read) that for the saving of woods salt should not be boyled but in certaine places. Neither let it seeme strange, that places have their names given them from Salt-pits, considering that wee may meet with many such here and there in every Country, and our Ancestors the Germans, as Tacitus writeth, had a religious per∣swasion and beliefe, that such places approach neerest to Heaven, and that mens prayers were no where sooner heard of the gods. This County, on which Warwick-shire confineth on the East, Glocester-shire on the South, bounded West-ward with Hereford-shire and Shrop-shire, North∣east with Stafford shire, to say all in one word, hath so temperate an ayre and soile so favourable, that for healthfulnesse and plenty, it is not inferiour to their neigh∣bour Countries, King Norton. and in one part for deinty Cheese surpasseth them: yeelding such store of Peares, as none other the like; and albeit they are not so pleasing to these deinty and delicate mouthes, yet out of their winish juice, they make a bastard kinde of wine called Pyrry, Pyrry. which they drinke very much, although it be (as other drinks of that kinde) both cold and full of winde. Neither is it if you respect waters, lesse pleasant and commodious: for, in every place there be passing sweet rivers, which affoord in great abundance the most delicate kinde of Fishes. And to let those runne by that are of lesse account, Severne that noble and renowned river carrieth his streame along, through the middest of the shire, from North to South: and Avon, that commeth downe out of Warwick-shire to meet with Severne, watereth the South part thereof. Severn, Kidderminster. Beawdley. first of all at his very entry, passeth betweene Kidderminster and Beawdley. This Beawdley worthily so called for the beautifull site thereof, standeth most plea∣santly upon the hanging of an hill, and hovereth over the river on the West side: of late daies well knowne for the admirable tallnesse of trees growing in the Forrest of Wyre adjoyning, which now in a manner be all gone. Whence our Poet and An∣tiquary Leland wrote thus. Delicium rerum Bellus Locus, undique floret Fronde coronatus Virianae tempora Sylvae. Beawdley a fine and deinty thing, is goodly to be seene, All dight about with guirland fresh of Wire that Forest greene. But now is this little Towne in speech and request onely for the pleasantnesse and beautie of it selfe; and withall for the Kings house Tiken-hall: which King Henry the Seventh built to be a retyring place for Prince Arthur, at which time he graunted some liberties to Beawdley. But farther from the river banke, Eastward is Kidderminster over against it, called also Kidelminster, a faire Towne and hath a great Mercate of all commodities, well frequented, parted in twaine by the little River Stowre that runneth through it: and the greatest ornaments now belonging thereto are first, a passing beautifull Church, wherein some of the worshipfull family of the Corkeseis lie buried, and the goodly gallant house of the Blounts of knights de∣gree, descended from those of Kinlet: but in old time this place was of most note for the Lords thereof, the Bissets, men in their time right honorable: whose rich possessions being at length dismembred and divided among sisters, came partly to the Barons of Abergevenny and in part to a Lazarhouse of women in Wilt-shire, which one of the said sisters, being her selfe infected with the Leprosie built for them that had the same dis∣ease, and enriched it with her owne patrimony and childs part. Afterwards it came to have a Baron, for King Richard the Second created Sir Iohn Beauchamp Steward of his household, Baron Beau∣champ of Kid∣derminster. Baron Beauchamp of Kidderminster, by letters Patents; and is ac∣counted the first Baron so created. But he soone after by the Barons (who together with the Commons rose, and contemning the Kings authority, called as many as were most deere unto the King to give an account for their misgovernement of the Common-weale) was with other right worthy persons, in malice to the King, con∣demned and beheaded. Hertlebury. Severne turning his course somewhat awry from thence, saluteth Hertlebury a Ca∣stle of the Bishops of Worcester not far distant, Holt, in old English, woods. and goeth amaine to Holt Castle, so cal∣led of a very thick wood there, belonging sometime to the Abtots ; after to the Beau∣champs ; who springing from William Beauchamp surnamed the Blinde Baron, grew up afterwards to be a most honorable family; the inheritance whereof descended at length to Gyse and Penyston: from hence runneth Severne downe, feeding such a num∣ber of fresh-water Lampries, Lampreies. as that Nature may seeme in this place to have made a very pond or Stew for them: such as the Romanes devised in ancient times when they grew lavish in riotous excesse. These fishes we call Lampries of the Latin word Lampetra, as one would say of licking the rocks, are like to Eeles, slippery and blac∣kish, howbeit beneath on their bellies, somewhat blew: on either side of their throates they receive and let in water at seven holes, for that they want gils altogether. Most commendable they are in the spring time, as being then very sweet: for, in Summer, the inner nerve or string, which stands them insteed of a backe bone, waxeth hard. The Italians make them more delicate in tast, by a speciall and peculiar seasoning: For they take a Lamprie and in Malvesy kill it, the mouth they close up with a nut∣meg, fill all the holes with as many cloves: and when it is rolled up round, putting thereto fillbard-nut kernels stamped, crums of bread, oile, malvesey, and spices, they boyle it with great care and certaine turnings over a soft and temperate fire of coles in a frying pan. But what have I to doe with such cookery and Apicius? Beneath Holt, Severne openeth his East banke to let in the river Salwarp comming a pace toward him. * This hath his first veines out of Lickey hill most eminent in the North part of this Shire, neare unto which at Frankeley the family of the Litletons was planted by Iohn Litleton, Litleton. aliàs Westcote the famous Lawyer, Justice in the Kings Bench in the time of King Edward the fourth, to whose Treatise of Tenures the stu∣dents of our Common Law are no lesse beholden, than the Civilians to Iustinians In∣stitutes. But to returne: This Salwarp which we speake of runneth downe by Bromes∣grove a mercate towne not of the meanest reckoning and not far from Grafton the seat of a yonger family of the Talbots, Grafton. since King Henry the Seventh gave it to Sir Gilbert Talbot, a yonger sonne of John, the second Earle of Shrewsbury: whom also for his martiall valour and singular wisdome he admitted into the society of the Order of the Garter, and made Governor of Callis. Then runneth Salwarp downe to Droit∣wich ( Durt-wich some terme it, Durt-wich. of the Salt pits and the wettish ground on which it standeth, like as Hyetus in B etia tooke name of the durty situation) where three foun∣taines yeelding plenty of water to make Salt of, Salt springs. divided a sunder by a little brooke of fresh water passing betweene, by a peculiar gi t of nature spring out: out of which most pure white Salt is boiled for sixe moneths every yeere, to wit, from Midsommer to Midwinter, in many set fornaces round about. Wherewith what a mighty deale of wood is consumed, Fekenham Forest. Fekenham Forest (where trees grew sometime thicker) and the woods round about, if men hold their peace, will by their thinnesse, make manifest more and more. * But if I should write that the learned Canonist Richard de la Wich Bishop of Chichester, Richard de la Wich. here borne, obtained with his fervent prayers these Salt springs out of the bowels of the earth, I feare me, least some might thinke me both over injurious to the providence of God, and also too credulous of old wives tra∣ditions. Yet were our ancestours in their pious devotion so hasty of beleefe, that they did not onely give credit hereto, yea and recorde it in their writings, but in consideration heereof, yeelded unto that Prelate in some sort divine honour, when Pope Urban the Fourth had for his sanctity, and sincere integrity of life canonized him a Saint. But before that ever this Richard was borne, Gervase of Tilbury wrote thus of these Salt springs, though not altogether truely. In the Bishopricke of Worce∣ster there is a country towne not farre from the City named Wich, in which at the foote of a certaine little hill, there runneth a most fresh water: in the banke whereof are seene a few pits or wels, of a reasonable depth, and their water is most salt. When this water is boyled in Cau∣drons, it becommeth thicke and turneth into passing white Salt, and all the Province fetcheth and carrieth it, for that betweene Christmas and the feast of S. Iohn Baptists Nativitie, good the water floweth most Salt: The rest of the yeere it runneth somewhat fresh, and nothing good to make Salt: and that which I take to be more wonderfull, when this salt water is run suf∣ficiently for the use of the Country, scarcely overfloweth it to any waste: Also when the time is once come of the saltnesse, the same is nothing at all allaid for all the vicinity of the fresh river water, neither is it found in any place neere unto the Sea. Moreover in the very Kings booke which we call Domesday, we read thus. In Wich the King and Earle have eight salt pits, which in the whole weeke wherein they boiled and wrought, yeelded on the Friday six∣teene Bullions. Salwarp having now entertained a small brooke descending from Chedesley, where anciently the family of Foliot flourished, as afterward at Longdon, maketh hast to Se∣verne which hath not passed foure miles farther, Worcester. before he runs hard by WORCES∣TER the principall City of this Shire; where he seemeth to passe with a flower streame, as it were, admiring, and wondering thereat all the while he passeth by: and worthy it is I assure you of admiration whether you respect either the antiquity, or the beauty thereof. Certes, for antiquity the Emperour Antonine hath made men∣tion of it under the name of BRANONIUM, and Ptolomee (in whom through the negligence of the transcribers it is misplaced) under the name of BRANOGENIUM, Branogenium. after which name the Britans call it yet Care Wrangon. In the Catalogue of Ninnius, it is named Caer Guorangon, and Caer Guorcon, the old English-Saxons afterward cal∣led it , and ; I dare not say of Wire that woody Forest which in old time stretched farre. Since the Conquest, the Latine writers named it Vigornia and Wigornia. Which name Ioseph the Monke of Excester a right elegant Poet in those daies was one of the first that used (if my memory faile me not:) I meane him that is published under the name of Cornelius Nepos, in these his elegant verses unto Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury. In numerum jam crescit honor, te tertia poscit Insula, jam meminit Wigornia, Cantia discit, Romanus meditatur apex, & naufraga Petri Ductorem in mediis expectat cymba procellis. A mitre third now waits for thee, for still thine honour growes, Thee Wigorne still remembereth, now Canterbury knowes: The See of Rome doth thinke of thee, and Peters ship in feare Of wracke, amid the boistrous stormes expects thee for to steare. Probable it is, that the Romanes built it, what time as they planted cities at certaine spaces and distances along the East banke of Severne, to keepe in the Britans beyond Severne, like as they did in Germany on the South banke of Rhene to represse the in∣cursions of the Germans. It standeth, in a place rising somewhat with a gentle ascent, by the rivers side that hath a faire bridge with a tower over it: proudly bearing it selfe in old time, as I finde it written in an ancient Manuscript roule, of the Romanes wall: and even now also it is well and strongly walled. But the fame and reputation that it now hath, ariseth from the Inhabitants, who are many in number, courteous and wealthy by the trade of clothing; from their faire and neat houses; from the number also of Churches, but most of all from the Bishops See, which Sexwulph Bishop of the Mer∣cians erected there in the yeere of Christ 680. having built a Cathedrall Church at the South side of the City, which hath been often repaired, and which the Bishops and Monkes by little and little have drawne out in length Westward, almost to the very brinke of Severn. Truly it is a passing faire and stately building adorned with the Monuments and Tombes of King Iohn, Arthur Prince of Wales, and divers of the Beauchamps ; and in these daies, it is no lesse notable by the Deane and Chapter, whom they call Prebendaries placed therein, than it was in times past for the Monkes, or the Cloister Priests: For, presently upon the first foundation, like as in other religious houses of England, Married Priests. Register of Worcester Church. Ann. 964. married Priests were placed heere, who carrying a long time a great opinion of holinesse governed the Churches, untill that Danstane Archbishop of Canterbury had decreed in a Synode, That from thence forward the religious men in England should live a single life. For then Oswald Bishop of this City who promoted the Monasticall life as busily as any whosoever, remooved the Priests, and brought in Monkes. Which King Eadgar testifieth in these words, The Monasteries as well of Monkes, as of Virgins have beene destroied, and quite neglected throughout England, which I have now determined to repaire to the glory of God, for my soules health, and so to multi∣ply the number of Gods servants and hand-maides. And now already I have set up seven and forty Monasteries with Monkes and Nunnes in them; and if Christ spare me life so long, I am determined in offering my devout munificence to God, for to proceed to fifty, even the just number of a Iubilee. Whereupon at this present, that Monastery which the reverend Bishop Oswald in the Episcopall See of amply enlarged to the honour of Mary the holy Mother of God, and by casting out those Clerkes, &c. hath with my assent and favour ap∣pointed there Monkes the religious servants of God; I my selfe doe by my royall authority confirme, and by the counsell and consent of my Peeres and Nobles, corroborate and consigne to those religious men living a sole and single life, &c. Long time after when the state of the Church and Clergy here, partly by the Danes incursion, and in part by civill dissenti∣ons, was so greatly weakened and brought upon the very knees, that in lieu of that multitude of religious persons whom Oswald had heere placed, scarce twelve remai∣ned: Wolstan Bishop of this Church about the yeer of the worlds redemption 1090. S. Wolstan. put to his helping hand, raised it up againe, and brought them to the number of 50. yea and built a new Church for them. Wolstan I say, a man not so learned (the times then were such) but of that simple sincerity without all hypocrisie, so severe also and au∣stere of life, that as he was terrible to the wicked, so he was venerable to the good, and after his death the Church registred him in the number of Saints. But King Henry the Eighth suppressed and expelled the Monkes after they had in all plenty and fulnesse lived more than 500. yeeres, and in their roomes he substituted a Deane and Prebendaries, and withall erected a Grammar-schoole for the training up of youth. Hard by this Church the bare name and plot of a Castle remaineth, which (as wee reade in William of Malmesburies booke of Bishops) Ursus appointed Sheriffe of Worcester∣shire by William the Conquerour, built under the very nose and in the mouth well neere of the Monkes, in so much as he cut away from them a part of their Church-yard. But this Castle through the iniquity of time and casuality of fire was consumed many yeeres ago. The City it selfe also hath been burnt more than once: as being set on fire in the yeere of Christ 1041. Marianus Huscarles. by Hardy-Cnute, who exceedingly incensed against the Citizens, because they had slaine his Huscarles (for so they tearmed those domesticall Gatherers of the Danes tribute) did not only set fire on the City, but slew the Citizens every mo∣thers sonne, unlesse it were those that saved themselves in an Island compas∣sed in with the River. Howbeit, as we finde written in King William the Conquerours booke, in King Edward the Confessours time, It had many Burgesses, and for fifteene Hides discharged it selfe: when the Mint went, every Minter gave twenty shillings at Lon∣don for to receive coyning stamps of money. In the yeere 1113. a skarfire that came no man knew how, burnt the Castle, caught also with the flames to the roofes of the Church. Likewise in the Raigne of Stephen, in the time of Civill Warres it was twice on fire: Anno 15. Stephen R. but most dangerously when King Stephen, who had to his owne damage given this City unto Wallerand Earle of Mellent, seized it into his owne hands: howbeit he was not able at that time to winne the Castle. Neverthelesse it raised it selfe up againe out of the ashes in a goodlier forme alwaies than it had before: and flourished in a right good state of civill government, governed by two Bailiffes cho∣sen out of 24. Citizens, two Aldermen, and two Chamberlains, with a Common Counsell consisting of 48. Citizens. As touching the Geographicall position of this City, it is distant in Longitude from the West Meridian 21. Degrees and 52. Mi∣nutes: and the North Pole is elevated 52. Degrees and 12. Mi∣nutes. From Worcester the River Severn running on still Southward, Barons de Powicke. passeth beside Po∣wicke, the seat in times past of Sir Iohn Beauchamp, whom King Henry the Sixth rai∣sed up to the state of a Baron: and within a small time, the female heires brought the inheritance to the Willoughbeies of Broke, the Reads, and the Lygons: then runneth it through most rich and redolent medowes by Hanley Castle, Hanley. belonging sometimes to the Earles of Glocester, Upton. and by Upton a Mercate Towne of great name: where peeces of Romane money are oftentimes found. Not farre from hence upon the banke on the right hand, Malvern hils. the Severn beholdeth Malvern-Hills, hills in deed or rather great and high mountaines, which for the space of seven miles or thereabout, doe as it were by degrees rise higher and higher, dividing this Shire from the County of He∣reford. On the brow of which Hills, Gilbert Clare Earle of Glocester did cast a Ditch in times past, to make a partition betweene his possessions and the lands of the Church of Worcester ; a peece of worke which is at this day seene not without wonder. Over a∣gainst those hils, Bredon hils. and in like distance almost from the other banke, Bredon Hills being farre lesse, yet in emulation, as it were, to match them, mount aloft: among which Elmsley Castle belonging sometimes to Ursus or Urso D' Abtot maketh a goodly shew: Elmesley Castle. by whose daughter and heire Emeline, it came hereditarily to the Beauchamps. At the foote of these hills lieth Bredon a Village, Bredon. The booke of Worcester. concerning the Monastery whereof Offa King of the Mercians saith thus: I Offa King of the Mercians will give land containing seven times five Acres of Tributaries unto the Monastery that is named Breodun in the Pro∣vince of the Wiccij, and to the Church of blessed Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles there and in that place standing, which Church Eanwulph my grandfather erected to the praise and glory of the everliving God. Under these Bredon hils Southward you see two villages named Washborne (whence Washborne. came the sirname to a very ancient and worshipfull Family in this Tract) standing in a parcell of this Province dismembred as it were from the rest of the body: Parcels of shires severed from the rest of the body. of which kinde there be other parcels here and there scattering all about. But what should be the cause, I am not able to resolve, unlesse haply those that in old time were gover∣nours, adjoined to their government their owne lands that lay neere unto the Regi∣on which they then governed. Now Avon, from above runneth downe and speeds himselfe to Severn, Eovesham. who in this shire watereth Eovesham, so called, as the Monkes write, of one Eoves, Swinheard to Egwin Bishop of Worcester, whereas before time, the name of it was E th-home and Heath-field. The booke of Evesham Mo∣nastery. About the yeere 1157. A very proper Towne situate upon an hill arising from the River: in the Suburb, as it were, whereof, was sometime Bengeworth Castle at the Bridge head; which Castle William de Audevill the Abbot recovered by law against William Beauchamp, utterly rased it, and caused the place to be hallowed for a Church-yard. A Towne this is, well knowne by reason of the Abbay, which that noble Egwin, with the helpe of King Kenred the sonne of Wolpher King of the Mercians founded about the yeere of our Lord 700. knowne likewise for the vale un∣der it, The Vale of Evesham. named thereof, The Vale of Evesham, which for plentifull fertility hath well de∣served to be called the Garnary of all these countries; so good and plentifull is the ground in yeelding the best corne aboundantly. But most knowne in elder time by oc∣casion of the great overthrow of the Barons and our Catiline, Simon Mont∣fort. Simon Montfort, Earle of Leicester. For, this man being of a lewd disposition and profound perfidiousnesse, hath taught us that which another truly said, That good turnes are so long acceptable, as they may be requitable. For, when King Henry the Third had with full hand heaped upon him all the benefits he could, yea and given him his owne sister in marriage, what other fruit reaped he of his so great bounty, but most bitter and deadly hatred? For, he raised a most dangerous Warre, hee spoiled shamefully a great part of Eng∣land; under pretense of restoring the common wealth and maintaining liberty: nei∣ther left he any thing undone, to bring the King under, to change the State, and of a Monarchy to bring in an Oligarchy. But in the end, after that fortune had for a good while favourably smiled upon him, he was slaine at this place with many others of his complices by the prowesse of Prince Edward: and forthwith, the sinke of lawlesse rebels, being as it were pumped and emptied out of the common weale, joyfull peace which hee had banished, shone againe most comfortably on every side. Upon the same River hard by, Charleton. standeth Charleton, the possession sometime of the ancient fami∣ly of Hansacres, Knights, but now of the Dinleies, or Dingleies, who being descended from that ancient stocke of the Dinleies in Lancashire, came unto this by hereditary succession. More beneath, in the primitive Church of our English Nation, there was another place wherein religious men lived to God, Flatbury. then called , now, Flatbury: Pershor. and neere unto it Pershor, in the English Saxons language , ta∣king the name from Peares: which, as we reade in that worthy Historiographer Willi∣am of Malmesbury, Egelward Duke of Dorset, a man bearing no nigardly minde, but excee∣ding liberall, founded and finished in King Eadgars time. But what detriment hath it su∣stained? one part of it the ambition of the rich seized upon, another part oblivion hath bu∣ried; but the greatest portion King Edward the Confessour, and King William bestowed upon the Church of Westminster. Then receiveth Avon a Riveret from the North, upon which standeth Hodington a seat of the Winters, out of which were Robert Winter and his brother Thomas, who when as they were of the hellish damned crew in the Gunpowder Treason, let their memory lie damned. From thence Avon running gently downe by Strensham the ha∣bitation of the Russels, Knights by degree, of ancient descent, in the end out-ladeth his owne streame into Severn. Neere to these places, on this South side, is Oswaldslaw Hundred, so called of Os∣wald Bishop of Worcester, Oswaldslaw Hundred. who obtained it for himselfe of King Eadgar. The immu∣nity whereof, when William Conquerour made a Survey and taxation of all Eng∣land, was registred in the Domesday booke, after this manner: The Church of Saint Mary of Worcester hath the Hundred called Oswaldslaw wherein lye 300. Hides, out of which the Bishop of the same Church by ancient order and custome hath all the revenewes of Soches and all customes or duties there, appertaining to the Lords victuall, and the Kings service and his owne: so that no Sheriffe may hold there any action or suit, neither in any plea nor in any other cause whatsoever. This witnesseth the whole County. A place there is about this Shire, but precisely where it should be, is not certainly knowne, Augustines oke. called , that is, Augustines Oke, at which Augustine the Apo∣stle of the Englishmen and the Bishops of Britaine met, and after they had disputed and debated the matter hotely for a good while, Anno Christi 603. touching the celebration of Easter, preaching God Word also to the English Nation, and of administring Baptisme ac∣cording to the rites of the Roman Church, in the end when they could not agree, they departed on both sides with discontented mindes, upon their dissenting opinions. Earles of Wor∣cester. Or, D'Abtot. This Province since the Normans comming in, had for the first Sheriffe, Vrsus or Vrso de Abtot, unto whom and his heires, King William the Conquerour granted that office together with faire and large possessions. After him succeeded his sonne Roger, who (as William of Malmesbury the Historiographer reporteth) enjoying his fathers possessions, through the high displeasure and indignation of King Henry the first was dis∣seized thereof, because in a furious fit of anger hee had commanded one of the Kings Officers to be killed. But this Sheriffedome was by Emeline this Rogers sister, translated heredi∣tarily into the Family of the Beauchamps. For, she was married to Walter Beauchamp, whom king Stephen, after he had put downe Miles of Glocester, ordained Constable of England. Within some few yeeres king Stephen created Walleran Earle of Mellent twin-brother to Robert Bossu Earle of Leicester, Robert de Monte. the first Earle of Worcester, having given unto him the Citie of Worcester: who afterwards, became a Monke and died at Pratellae in Normandie, in the yeere 1166. As for his sonne Robert, who had wed∣ded the daughter of Reginald Earle of Cornwall, and advanced the Standard of rebel∣lion against King Henry the Second, and Peter his sonne, who in the yeere 1203. revolted to the French, neither of them used the title of Worcester, but onely of Mellent, so farre as ever I could yet read. For King Henry the Second who succee∣ded Stephen, would not easily suffer that any under him should enjoy the honors re∣ceived from Stephen an usurper, and his enemy. For (as I finde in the Annales of Waverley Abbay ) he put downe those imaginary and counterfeit Earles, among whom King Stephen had inconsideratly distributed, and given away all the revenewes pertaining to the Exchequer. Neither to my knowledge, was there any one that bare the title of the Earldome of Worcester, untill the daies of King Richard the Second. For he be∣stowed it upon Sir Thomas Percy, who, when he conspired against King Henry the Fourth, was taken at the battaile of Shrewsbury, and there beheaded. Then Sir Ri∣chard Beauchamp descended from the Abtots, received afterward this honor at the hands of King Henry the Fifth. Who shortly after in the French war lost his life at the siege of Meaux in Brye, leaving one onely daughter married to Sir Edward Nevill, from whom descended the late Lords of Abergevenny. Afterward King Henry the Sixth created John Tiptoft, Earle of Worcester: But when he presently taking part with King Edward the Fourth, had applied himselfe in a preposterous obsequious∣nesse to the humor of the said King, and being made Constable of England plaied the part, as it were, of the butcher in the cruell execution of diverse men of qualitie, himselfe, when as King Henry the Sixth was now repossessed of the crowne, came to the blocke. Howbeit, his sonne Edward recovered that honor when King Edward recovered his Kingdome: * But after that this Edward died without issue, and the in∣heritance became divided among the sisters of the said John Tiptoft Earle of Worce∣ster, Orig. 1. H. 7. R. 36. of whom one was married to the Lord Roo , another to Sir Edmund Ingoldes∣thorpe, and the third to the Lord Dudley ; Sir Charles Somerset, base sonne to Henry Duke of Somerset, Lord Herbert, and Lord Chamberlaine to King Henry the Eighth, was by him created Earle of Worcester. After whom succeeded in lineall descent, Henry, William, and Edward who now flourisheth, and among other laudable parts of vertue and Nobility, highly favoureth the studies of good literature. There are in this Shire Parishes. 152. STAFFORDIAE COMITATVS PARS olim Cornauiorum STAFFORD-SHIRE. T HE third Region of the old CORNAVII, now called STAFFORD-SHIRE, in the English Saxons Language , Midland Eng∣lish men. the Inhabitants whereof because they dwelt in the middest of England, are in Bede termed Angli Mediterranei, that is, Midland Englishmen, having on the East Warwick-shire, and Darby-shire, on the South side Worcester-shire, and Westward Shropp-shire bordering upon it, reacheth from South to North in forme of a Lozeng, broader in the middest and growing narrower at the ends. The North part is full of Hilles and so lesse fruitfull: the middle being watered with the River Trent is more plentifull, clad with Woods, and embroidered gallantly with Corne fields and medowes: as is the South part likewise, which hath Coles also digged out of the earth and mines of Iron. Iron. But whether more for their commodity or hinderance, I leave to the Inhabitants who doe, or shall best understand it. In the South part in the very confines with Worcester-shire upon the River Stour standeth Stourton Castle, sometimes belonging to the Earles of Warwicke, the na∣tall place of Cardinall Pole ; Dudley castle. and then Dudley Castle towreth up upon an hill built and named so of one Dudo, or Dodo an English Saxon, about the yeere of our Salva∣tion 700. In King William the Conquerours daies, as we finde in his Domesday Booke, William Fitz-Ausculph possessed it: afterwards it fell to Noble men sirnamed Some∣ry ; and by an heire generall of them to Sir Richard Sutton knight descended from the Suttons of Nottingham-shire: whose Posterity commonly called from that time Lords of Dudley, but summoned to Parliament first by King Henry the Sixth, grew up to a right honourable Family. Under this lyeth Pensueth Chace, * in former times better stored with game; wherein are many Cole-pits, in which, as they reported to mee, there continueth a fire begunne by a candle long since through the negligence of a grover or digger. The smoke of this fire, and sometime the flame is seene, but the savour oftener smelt: and other the like places were shewed unto mee not farre off. North-West ward upon the Confines of Shropp-shire, I saw Pateshull a seat of the Astleies de∣scended from honourable Progenitours; and Wrotesley an habitation of a Race of Gentlemen so sirnamed, out of which Sir Hugh Wrotesley, for his approoved valour, was chosen by King Edward the Third Knight of the Garter, at the first institution, and so accounted one of the founders of the said honourable Order. Next after this, the memorable places that wee meet with in this Tract, more inwardly, are these, Chellington. Giffards. Chellington, a faire house and Manour of the ancient Family of the Giffards: which in the Raigne of Henry the Second Peter Corbuchin gave to Peter Giffard, upon whom also Richard Strongbow, that Conquerour of Ireland, bestowed in free gift Tachmelin and other Possessions in Ireland. * Theoten hall, which is by in∣terpretation, The habitation of Heathens, Tetnall. or Pagans, at this day Tetnall embrued with Danish bloud in the yeere 911. by King Edward the Elder in a bloudy Battaile. Ulfrunes Hampton, so called of Wulfruna a most godly and devout woman, who enriched the Towne (called before simply Hampton ) with a religious House: Wolver∣hampton. and for Wulfrunes Hampton it is corruptly called Wulver Hampton: The greatest name and note whereof, ariseth by the Church there, annexed to the Warden or Deane and Prebendaries of Windsor. Weddsborro Weadsbury, in these dayes Weddsborrow fortified in old time, by Aethelfled Lady of the Mercians : and Walshall a Mercate Towne, none of the meanest. Tame River. Neere unto which the River Tame carryeth his streame, which rising not farre off, for certaine miles wandereth through the East part of this Shire seeking after Trent, Draiton Bass neere unto Draiton Basset, the seat of the Bassets, who springing out from Turstan Lord of this place in the Raigne of Henry the First, branched forth into a great and notable Family. Bassets. For, from hence as from a stocke flourished the Bassets of Welleden, of Wiccomb, of Sapcot, of Cheddle, and others. But of this of Draiton, Raulph was the last, who being a right renowned Baron had marryed the sister of John Mont∣fort Duke of Britaine, and in the Raigne of Richard the Second died without issue. Then Tame passing through the Bridge at Falkesley (over which an ancient high way of the Romanes went) runneth hard under Tamworth, in the Saxon Tongue , Tamworth. Marianus calleth it Tamawordia, a Towne so placed in the Confines of the two Shires, that the one part which belonged sometime to the Marmions, is counted of Warwick-shire, the other which pertained to the Hastings, of Stafford-shire. As for the name, it is taken from Tame the Riuer running beside it, and of the English Sax∣on word , which signifieth a Barton, Court, or Ferme-house, and also, an Holme or River Island, or any place environed with water: seeing that Keyserwert and Bo∣melswert in Germanie, betoken as much as Caesars Isle and Bomels Isle. Whiles the Mercians Kingdome stood in state, this was a place of their Kings resiance, and as we finde in the Lieger Booke of Worcester, a Towne of very great resort and passing well frequented. Afterward, when in the Danes Warre it was much decaied, Aethel∣fled Lady of Mercia repaired and brought it againe to the former state: also Edith King Eadgars Sister, who refusing Marriage, for the opinion that went of her for holinesse was registred in the roll of Saints, founded heere a little house for Nunnes and veiled Virgins, which after some yeeres, was translated to Pollesworth by the Mar∣mions of Normandie, Lords heereof; at what time they erected heere a Collegiat Church, wherein are seene some of their Sepulchres; and builded a faire Castle, which from them by the Frevills came to the house of those Ferrars, that descen∣ded from a younger brother of the Barons Ferrars of Groby. The Kings Champion. Those Marmions as wee finde written, were by inheritance the Kings Champions of England. For, whensoever any new king of England is crowned, the heire of this Family was bound to ride armed in compleat harneis upon a barbd horse into the Kings hall, See in Lincoln∣shire. and in a set forme of words challenge to combat with whosoever durst oppose himselfe against the kings right and Title. Inquisit. 2. E 3. And verily it appeareth upon Records, that Alexander Frevill, under king Edward the Third, by the same service, held this Castle. Howbe∣it at the Coronation of king Richard the Second, when Baldwin Frevill exhibited his petition for the same, it was adjudged from this Family to Sir John Dimock his com∣petitor, descended also from Marmion, as producing better Records and evidences. At Falkesley Bridge aforesaid (that I may retire a little) that Romane High way Watling street, Watling street. of which I have already spoken and must often speak, entreth in∣to this Shire, and cutting it through (as it were by a streight line) goeth West∣ward into Shropp-shire. Which Streete I have I assure you throughly viewed and perused, Etocetum. to finde out that ETOCETUM which Antonine the Emperour setteth downe for the next station from MANVESSEDUM or Mancester in Warwick-shire: and surely by good happe I have now found it; and freely confesse that heeretofore I was farre wide and quite out of the way. For, just at the same distance that Antonine setteth betweene MANVESSEDUM, and ETOCETUM, I lighted upon the carkasse of an old little Towne upon the said High way, and scarce a mile Southward from Lichfield, a Bishops See right well knowne. The name of the place at this day is in our common language, Wall. Wall, of the Reliques of an old wall there re∣maining and taking up much about two acres of ground, which they call Castle croft, as one would say, The Castle Field. Over against which on the other side of the street the Inhabitants relate by a tradition from their forefathers, that there stood an an∣cient Towne, destroyed long before the Conquest. And they shew the very place, where by the maine foundation they ghesse the Temple there stood, and with all they produce peeces of money, coined by the Roman Emperours and found there, as most certaine testimonies in this behalfe. But (that which maketh most for the proofe heereof) from hence leadeth the Romane Way called Watling street, with a faire, apparent, and continued causey, in manner, throughout, untill it bee broken off with the River Penck, and hath upon it a Stone-bridge at PENNOCRUCIUM, so named of the River, just at the same distance that Antonine setteth downe. Which hath not yet laied away so much as the name, for in steed of PENNOCRUCIUM it is now called Penck-ridge. Penck-ridge. But at this day it is little better than a Village, famous for an Horse-Faire which the Lord of the place Hugh Blunt, obtained of King Ed∣ward the Second. From hence, that way hath nothing memorable upon it in this Shire, but a little way off is Brewood a Mercate Towne, where the Bishops of this Diocesse had an habitation before the Conquest: and then neere unto Weston is a cleere Poole spread very broad, by which that notable way holdeth on a direct course to Oken-Yate in Shrop-shire. Now are wee to visite the middle part of this Shire which Trent watereth: in the description whereof, I purpose to follow the course and windings of the River, from the very spring and head thereof, The River Trent. as my best guide. Trent that by his due right cha∣lengeth to himselfe the third place among all the Rivers of England, runneth out of two Fountaines being neere neighbours together in the North part of this shire a∣mong the moores. Certaine unskilfull, and idle headed, have dreamed that it was so named of Trent a French word that signifieth Thirty, and thereupon also have feigned, that thirty Rivers runne into it, and as many kindes of fishes live therein, the names whereof the people dwelling thereby were wont to sing in an English rhyme: neither make they doubt to ascribe that unto this Trent, which the Hungarians a∣vouch of their River Tibiscus, namely, that two parts of it are water, and the third fish. From his spring heads Trent trickleth downe first Southward fetching many a com∣passe, not farre from New Castle under Lime, New Castle under Lyme. so called of another more ancient Castle that flourished in times past hard by at Chesterton under Lime: where I saw tot∣tered and torne the walls of a Castle; which by the gift of King John, belonged first unto Ranulph Earle of Chester, and afterwards by the bounteous favour of King Henry the Third, Trentham. unto the House of Lancaster. Thence by Trent-ham, sometime Tricing-ham, a little Monastery of that holy virgin Saint Werburg of the bloud roy∣all, hee hasteneth to Stone a Mercate Towne, Stone. which having the beginning in the Saxons time, tooke that name of the Stones, that our Ancestours after a solemne sort had cast on a heape to notifie the place where Wolpher that heathenish King of the Mercians, most cruelly slew his two sonnes Wulfald and Rufin, because they had taken upon them the profession of Christianity. In which place when Posterity in memoriall of them had consecrated a little Church, straight wayes there arose and grew up a Towne, which of those stones, had the name Stone given unto it, as the History of Peterborrough hath recorded. Beyond Stone runneth Trent mildly by Sandon, the seat in times past of the Staffords, most worthy Knights, Erdeswick. but lately by inheritance from them, of Sampson Erdes∣wicke, a very great lover, and diligent searcher of venerable Antiquity, and in this regard no lesse worthy of remembrance than for that he is directly in the male line descended from Sir Hugh Vernon Baron of Shipbroc, Names altered according to divers habita∣tions. the name being changed, by the use of that age according to sundry habitations, first into Holgrave, and after∣wards into Erdeswicke. Heere Trent turneth his course aside Eastward, and on the South hath Canocwood, commonly called Cankwood, Cankwood. spred farre and wide, and at length entertaineth the River Sow, which breaketh out in a hard Country neere Healy Castle, built by the Barons of Aldalegh, LL. Audley. or Audley, unto whom Hervey Lord Stafford gave that place; like as Theobald Verdon, gave Aldelegh it selfe. This hath beene a Family of high respect and great honour, * and of the same stem out of which the Stanleies Earles of Darby derive their Descent. Strange it is to reade, what lands King Henry the Third confirmed unto Henry Audeley, which were be∣stowed upon him by the bounty of the Peeres; yea and private Gentlemen, not only in England but also in Ireland, where Hugh Lacy Earle of Vlster gave him lands with the Constableship of Vlster. So that doubtlesse he was either a man of rare vertue, or a gracious favourite, or a great Lawyer; or else all jointly. His posterity matched in marriage with the heires of the Lord Giffard of Brimsfield, of Baron Martin Lord of Keimeis, and Barstaple ; and a younger brother of this house with one of the heires of the Earle of Glocester, and was by King Edward the Third created Earle of Glocester. About which time James Lord Audley flourished in Chivalry, who (as the French write) being grievously wounded in the battaile at Poitiers, when the blacke Prince with many comfortable commendations had given him 400. Markes of yeerely re∣venewes; he bestowed the same forthwith upon his foure Esquires, who alwaies vali∣antly attended him, and satisfied the Prince, doubting that his gift was too little for so great service, with this answer, dutifully acknowledging his bounty: It is meet that I doe well for them who deserved best of me. These my Esquiers saved my life amidst my ene∣mies: And God be thanked, my ancestours have left me sufficient revenewes to maintaine me in your service. Whereupon the Prince approving this prudent liberality, both confirmed his gift to his Esquires, and assigned him moreover lands to the value of six hundred Markes yeerely. But by his daughter one of the coheires to her brother, the Title of Lord Audley came afterward to the Touchets, and in them continueth. Neither must I heere passe over in silence an house in this tract called Gerards Bromley, both for the magnificence thereof, and also because it is the principall seat of Sir Thomas Gerard, whom King James in the first yeere of his Raigne created Baron Gerard of Gerards Bromley. This Sow as it were a parallel river unto Trent runneth even with him, and keeping an equall distance still from him, by Chebsey, which had in times past for Lords therof the Hastangs reputed among the prime Nobility in the time of King Edward the First; Hastange. not farre from Eccleshall the habitation of the Bishop of Lichfield, and Ellenhall which was sometime the seat of the Noels a worshipfull house, Noel. who founded heere a Monastery at Raunton, Harcourt. and from whom it descended hereditarily to the Harcourts, who being of the ancient Norman nobility, flourished a long time in great dignity. But yet of the male heires of the Noels there remaine still Sir Edward Noel of Dalby in Leicester-shire, and the Noels of Wellesborow in Leicester-shire, with others. Then run∣neth Sow under Stafford, Stafford. Cap grave. in times past called Statford, and before time Betheney, where Bertelin reputed a very holy man led in ancient times an Eremits life in ser∣ving God. And King Edward the Elder built on the South banke of the River a Ca∣stle in the yeere of Christ 914. Marianus. What time as King William the Conquerour re∣gistred the Survey of all England, as we reade in his Domesday Booke, The King had in it only 18. Burgesses in his owne domaine, and 20. Mansions of the honour of the Earle: it paid for all customes nine pounds of deniers, and had thirteene Chanons, Prebendaries who held in franke Almoine: and the King commanded a Castle to bee made, which now is destroy∣ed. But then, * as now also, it was the head Towne of the whole Shire: howbeit the greatest credite and honor thereof came from Stafford Castle adjoyning, which the Barons of Stafford, of whose progeny were the Dukes of Buckingham, built for their owne seat, who procured of King John that it was made a Burrough with ample li∣berties, caused it to be partly fensed with a Wall, and erected a Priory of Blacke Chanons to the honour of Saint Thomas of Canterbury: Beneath which, the Riveret Penke, which gave name to Pennocrucium or Penkridge, whereof I have already spo∣ken, joyneth with that Sow aforesaid. And neere unto the confluence of Sow and Trent standeth Ticks hall, Ticks hall. the dwelling place of the Astons, a Family which for anti∣quity, kinred, and alliance, is in these parts of great name. Trent having harboured these rivers in his chanell, passeth now through the mids of the Shire with a gentle streame, Chartley. taking a view of Chartley Castle standing two miles aside from the banke on the left hand: which Castle came from Raulph Earle of Chester, L. Ferrars of Chartley. who built it, unto the Ferrars by Agnes his sister, whom William Ferrars Earle of Darby had marryed: out of whose Race the Lords Ferrars of Chartley flourished: and Anne the Daughter of the last of them brought this Honour as her dowry unto Sir Walter D'Eureux her husband: from whom Robert D'Eve∣reux Earle of Essex and Lord Ferrars of Chartley is lineally descended. On the right side of the river about the same distance, standeth most pleasantly a∣mong the woods, Beaudesert. L L. Paget. Beaudesert, the lodge in times past of the Bishops of Lichfield, but now the house of the Lord Paget. For Sir William Paget, who for his approoved wisdome both at home and abroad, stood in high favour with King Henry the Eight, and King Edward the Sixth, and obteined at their hands faire possessions, was by the said K. Edward the Sixth created Lord Paget of Beaudesert. He was (that I may note so much out of his Epitaph) Secretary, and Privy Counsellour to King Henry the Eighth, and appointed by his Testament Counsellour and aidor to King Ed∣ward the Sixth, during his minority. To whom he was Chauncellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster, Controller of the house, and by him made, as I said, Baron and knight of the Garter, as by Queene Mary Lord Privy Seale: Whose grandsonne William is now the fourth Baron Pagets, and for his vertue and studies of the best arts, is an ho∣nour to his house, and in this respect deserveth to be honorably remembred. From thence may you descrie Lichfield, Lichfield. scarce foure miles from this right-side banke of Trent. Bede calleth it Licidfeld, which Rosse of Warwick interpreteth, Cada∣verum campus, that is, The field of dead bodies, and reporteth that a number of Christi∣ans were there Martyred under the persecutor Dioclesian. This City is low seated, of a good largenesse and faire withall, divided into two parts with a shallow poole of cleere water: which parts notwithstanding joyne in one by the meanes of two bridges or causeies made over, that have their sluces to let out the water. The South part, which is on the hither side is the greater, consisting of divers streets, hath in it the schoole, and an hospitall of Saint John, founded for reliefe of the poore. The far∣ther part is the lesse, but beautified with a very goodly Cathedrall Church, which being round about compassed with a faire wall castle-like, and garnished beside with faire houses of Prebendaries, and with the Bishops palace also, doth mount upon high with three pyramids or spires of stone making an excellent shew, and for ele∣gant and proportionall building, yeeldeth to few Cathedrall Churches. In this place many ages past, a Bishops See was established, for in the 656. yeere after the Worlds redemption, Oswie King of Northumberland, having vanquished the Mercians, as then Pagans, for the propagation of Christs true religion, built heere a Church, and ordeined Duina the first Bishop: whose successors found such favour at their Princes hand, that they had not onely the preheminence among all the Bi∣shops of the Mercians, and the greatest possessions given unto them for their use, as Cankwood or Canock a very great wood, and other faire lands and Lordships; but also this Church had an Archbishop that sat in it, namely Eadulph, unto whom Pope Adrian granted an Archiepiscopall Pall, and subjected under him all the Bishops of the Mercians and East Angles; mooved thereunto with golden reasons by Offa King of the Mercians, About the yeere 779. History of Rochester. to spite Lambert the Archbishop of Canterbury, who had promised to aide Charles the Great, if he would invade England. But this Archie∣piscopall dignity died together with Offa and Eadulph. But, among all the Bishops of this See Cedda. Chadd was of greatest fame, and canonized a Saint for his holinesse, who, as Bede saith, when riotous excesse had not yet possessed the hearts of Bishops, made himselfe a mansion house standing not farre remote from the Church, wherein he was wont secretly to pray and reade, together with a few, that is to say, seven or eight religious men, as oft as he had any vacant time from painefull preaching and ministery of the word unto the people. Wil. Malmes∣bur. A. In those daies, Lichfield was a small towne farre short of the frequency of Cities; the Country about it full of woods: and a little river runneth hard by it. The Church was seated in a narrow roome, evidently shewing the meane estate and abstinence of our ancestours. When as in the Synode holden in the yeere of our Lord 1075. it was forbidden that Bi∣shops Sees should lie obscure in meane and small Townes, Peter Bishop of Lichfield translated his See to Chester: but Robert Linsey his successour remooued the same un∣to Coventry. A little after, Roger Clinton brought it backe againe to Lichfield, and beganne to build in the yeere of Christ 1148. this most beautifull Church in the honour of the blessed virgin Mary at Saint Ceda, or Chad: and repaired the Castle which now is ut∣terly vanished. As for the towne, it was made first an Incorporation in our Fathers remembrance by King Edward the Sixth, by the name of Bailiffs and Burgesses. It seeth the Pole Artick elevated two and fifty degrees and two and forty minutes: and from the farthest point of the West counteth one and twenty degrees and twenty minutes. This Poole of Lichfield being by and by kept and restreined with∣in bankes, and spreading broader the second time, but gathering againe into a cha∣nell is quickly swallowed into Trent, who continueth his course East-ward, untill he meeteth with the river of Tame from the South: with whom Trent being now coupled, turneth aside his streame Northward through places that yeeld great store of Alabaster, Alabaster. Burton upon Trent. that he might the sooner entertaine Dow, and so almost insulateth or encompasseth Burton, a Towne in times past of name, by reason of workers in Ala∣baster, a Castle of the Ferrars built in the Conquerors time, an ancient Abbay foun∣ded by Ulfrick Spot Earle of Mercia, Who also it na∣med Mowen. and the retyring place of Modwen that holy Irish woman, who there dedicated her selfe first to the service of God. Concerning which Abbay, 1904. the Leger-booke of Abingdon recordeth thus. A certaine servitour of King Aetheldred named Ulfrick Spot, built the Abbay of Burton, and gave unto it all the inheritance that came by his Father, esteemed worth seven hundred pounds, and that this his donation might stand good and sure, he gave unto King Aetheldred three hundred Man∣kus of gold for his confirmation, and to every Bishop five Mankus, and beside to Alfrick Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, the Towne Dumbleton. Whereby wee may understand, that there was a golden world then, and that gold swaied much yea in Church matters, and among Church-men. In this abbay, the said Modwen, whose holinesse was much celebrated in this tract, lay buried, and upon her Tombe were engraven for an Epi∣taph these verses. Ortum Modwennae dat Hibernia, Scotia finem. Anglia dat tumulum, dat Deus astra poli. Prima dedit vitam, sed mortem terra secunda, Et terram terrae tertia dedit: Auffert Lanfortin quam Tir Conell. terra Conallea profert, Foelix Burtonium virginis ossa tenet. In Ireland Modwen who began, in Scotland tooke her end, England on her a Tombe bestow'd, to Heaven God did her send: The first of these lands gave her life, the second wrought her death, And earth to earth in decent sort, the third land did bequeath. Lanfortin taketh that away, which once Tir-Connell gave, And Burton blest, whose hap it is this virgines bones to have. The River Blith. Needwood Forest. Neere unto Burton, betwixt these three rivers, Dove, Trent and Blith the which watereth and nameth Blithfield a faire house of the ancient and worthy Family of the Bagots; Needwood a very large wood and full of parkes spreadeth it selfe. Wherein the Nobility and Gentlemen dwelling thereabout, take their jolly pleasure and dis∣port themselves in hunting. Thus much of the places in the midle part of this shire. Mooreland. The North part riseth up and swelleth somewhat mountainous, with moores and hilles, but of no great bignesse, which beginning here, runs like as Apennine doth in Italie, through the middest of England with a continued ridge, rising more and more with divers tops and cliffs one after another even as far as to Scotland, although often∣times they change their name. For heere they are called Mooreland, after a while the Peak, Blackstone edge, then Craven, anon as they goe further Stanmore, and at length be∣ing parted diversly, as it were into hornes, Cheviot. This Mooreland, so called for that it riseth higher into hils and mountaines, and is withall lesse fruitfull (which kind of pla∣ces we call in our language Moores ) is a small country verily, so hard, so comfortlesse, bare and cold, that it keepeth snow lying upon it a long while: in so much as that of a lit∣tle country village named Wotton lying here under Woverhill the neighbor inhabitants have this rime rise in their mouth, as if God, forsooth, had never visited that place. Wotton under Wever, Where God came never. Yet in so hard a soile it breedeth and feedeth beasts of large bulke, and faire spread. The people heere dwelling observe, that when the winde sitteth West, it is alwaies raine: but the East and Southwinde, which in other places brew and broach raine, bring faire weather, unlesse the winde turne from West into the South: and this they ascribe unto the vicinity of the Irish Sea. Out of these Moores most rivers in this shire doe spring, but the chiefe are, Dove, Hanse, Churnet, Teyn, Blith, and Trent him∣selfe who receiveth every one of them, The River Dove. and conveieth them all to the Sea. Dow or Dove, whose bankes are reared out of solid hard lime stone, which they burne and use for compast to manure and enrich their fields with all, doth swiftly runne along the most part of the East side of this Country, and separateth it from Darby-shire, hold∣ing on his course in a Cleyish channell without any beds or shelves of mud, through a soile consisting of the said Lime-stone: from whence it sucketh out such fertilitie, that in the very middest of Winter, the Medowes on both the bankes sides carry a most pleasant and fresh greene hew: but if it chance to swell above the bankes and overflow the Medowes in Aprill, it battelleth them like another Nilus, and maketh them so fruitfull that the inhabitants use commonly to chant this joyfull note. In Aprill Doves flood, Is worth a Kings good. This river in twelve houres space useth so to rise, that it harieth and carrieth away with it sheepe and other cattaile, to the great terror of the people dwelling thereby: but within the same time againe it falleth and returnes within his owne bankes: whereas Trent being once up and over his bankes floweth upon the fields foure or five daies together: Hans. Churnet. De-la-cres. but now come we to the rivers that run into it. The first is Hans, which being swallowed up under the ground, breaketh up againe three miles off. Then admitteth he the fellowship of the river Churnet, who passeth by De-la-Cres Ab∣bay, built by Ranulph the third of that name Earle of Chester: by Leike also a well knowne Mercat towne, Aulton. and by Aulton a Castle in times past belonging to the Barons Verdon (who founded heere the Abbay of Croxden ) from whom by the Furnivals it descended to the Talbots Earles of Shrewsbury. Teyn. A little below runneth Teyn a small brooke into Dove, which having his head not far from Cheddle the ancient seat of the Bassets, who derive their pedegree from the Bassets of Draiton, creepeth on in such a winding and crooked chanell, that within one mile I was faine to passe over it foure times. Checkley. Neere unto it in Checkley Church-yard, there stand three stones upright erected in maner of a Pyramides ; two of them have little images engraven upon them: but that in the middest is highest. The inhabitants report by tradition, that a battaile was fought there betweene two hosts, of which the one was armed, the other unarmed; and that in it were three Bishops slaine, in memoriall of whom these stones were set up. But what Historicall truth indeed lieth heerein enfolded, I know not as yet: As for Blith, it hath in this Moreland Careswell a Castler situate upon it which Sir William Careswell built with great ponds having their heads made of square stones, and Drai∣cot, which gave surname to a family of great antiquity in this County. But Dove after it hath received Tine having a faire bridge made over it of most hard stone, Utcester. and defended with piles runneth under Vtcester, in' the Saxons tongue , and Vttoxather, situate upon the side of an hill with a gentle ascent: a towne more rich in gay flowring medowes, and in cattaile, than faire built; which be∣fore I saw it (the name was so favourable to my conjecture) I thought, in vaine, to have been the ancient ETOCETUM. But now, time hath taught me more cer∣teinty. After this, Tutesbury. when Dove is now come neerer unto Trent, it visiteth Tutbury Ca∣stle, in times past a large and stately thing, which also is called Stutesbury, and from an Alabaster hill top on which it stands, threatneth, as it were, the whole country un∣derneath. It was built together with a little Monastery by Henry de Ferrars a Noble man of Normandy, unto whom King William the First had given great lands and re∣venewes in this shire: all which Robert de Ferrars Earle of Darby lost after he had re∣volted a second time from King Henry the Third. For, this Robert, when, after ma∣ny troubles which he had raised in the Barons war, hee was received into the Kings favour, and had bound himselfe with a corporall oth in expresse and formall words that he would continue ever after loyall to his liege Lord, yet was the man of such a stirring and restlesse spirit, that to break and knap in peeces quite that fortune which he could not bend, he put on armes against his Soveraigne, and being at length taken prisoner (that I may use the very words of the Record, according to the forme of his obligation ) made this great forfeiture both of his fortunes and dignities. There is in some place of this shire a lake, if Alexander Necham deceive us not, into which no wilde beast will in any wise enter: but since the place is uncertaine and the thing it selfe more un∣certaine, I will onely put downe underneath these his verses, In his booke entituled the praises of Di∣vine wisdome. before which he pre∣fixed this Title. De Lacu in Staffordia. Rugitu Lacus est eventus praeco futuri, Cujus aquis fera se credere nulla solet. Instet odora canum virtus, mors instet acerba, Non tamen intrabit exagitata lacum. Of a Lake in Stafford-shire. A Lake there is that roreth loud, whereby things are fore-showne, The water whereof once to take wild beasts were never knowne. Let hounds, let death pursue apace them for to overtake, For all this chase and hot pursuite, none enter will the Lake. Gervase of Til∣bury. Of another Poole or Lake also in this Country thus writeth Gervase of Tilbury in his Otia Imperialia, unto Otho the fourth. In the Bishopricke of Coventry and County of Staf∣ford, at the foot of an hill, which the inborne people of the Country have named Mahull, there is a water spread abroad in maner of a Meere, in the territory of a Village which they tearme Mag∣dalea. In this Meere or Marsh there is a most cleere water (and an infinite number of woods be∣side joyning one unto another) which hath such an effectuall vertue in refreshing of bodies, that so often as Hunters have chased Stagges and other Deere untill their Horses be tired, if in the greatest heate of the scorching Sunne they taste of this water, and offer it unto their Horses for to drinke, they recover their strength of running againe which they had lost, and become so fresh, as one would thinke they had not run at all. But whereabout this is I cannot yet learne by all my diligent inquiry. Earles and Ba∣rons of Staf∣ford. As for the title of Stafford, it remaineth ever since Robert de Stafford, whom King William of Normandy enriched with great possessions, even untill our time in his line and progeny. A family as noble and ancient as any other: but upon which fortune hath otherwhiles by turnes both frowned and fawned. For, first they were Barons of Stafford, then five of them Earles of Stafford, Ralfe created by King Edward the Third, Earle of Stafford, who married the heire of Sir Hugh Audley Earle of Glocester, Hugh his sonne who died in Pilgrimage at Rhodes, and his three sonnes successively, Thomas and William, both issuelesse, and Edmund who married the daughter and heire of Tho∣mas of Woodstock Duke of Buckingham. See Dukes of Buckingham. Afterward three of them were Dukes of Buc∣kingham and Earles of Stafford, &c. as is before shewed. By the attainder of the last of them, those so great inheritances which their most honorable marriages brought un∣to them, floted away as it were, and scattered heere and there. In lieu whereof hath ensued a more secure quietnesse, which can never cohabite with Greatnesse. There are accounted in this Shire Parishes. 130. SALOPIAE Comitatus quem CORNA∣UII olim inceluarunt des∣criptio SHROPP-SHIRE. T He fourth Country of those, which, as I said, the CORNA∣VII in times past inhabited, the English Saxons called and , wee SHROPP-SHIRE, and the Latinists Comitatus Salopiensis, is farre greater than the rest in quantity, and not inferiour to them either for plenty or pleasure. On the East side it hath Stafford-shire, on the West Montgomery shire, and Denbigh-shire, on the South side Worcester, Hereford, and Radnor-shires, and on the North Cheshire. It is replenished with Townes and Castles standing thicke on every side, by reason that it was a Frontier Country, or (that I may use the tearme of Siculus Flaccus ) Ager arcifinius, in regard of repelling and repressing the Welshmen in the Marches bordering heerupon: whereupon our Ancestours by an ancient word, named the Confines of this Shire toward Wales the Marches, for that they were bounds and limits betweene the Welsh and English, The Marcher L. Marchers. Marchiones i old Histories. and divers Noblemen in this Tract were called Barons of the Marche, and Lords Marchers, who had every one in their Territory a certaine peculiar jurisdiction, and in their owne Courts mini∣stred law unto the Inhabitants, with sundry priviledges and immunities, and this among other, that Writs out of the Kings Courts, should in certaine cases have no place nor runne among them. Neverthelesse, if any controversie arose about a Lordship it selfe, or the limits of Lordships, they were to resort unto the Kings Courts of justice. These also were in times past named in Latin Records Marchi∣ones de Marchia Walliae, as Marquesses of the Marches of Wales, or Lords Marchers, as appeareth evidently by the Red Booke in the Kings Exchequer, where wee reade, how at the Coronation of Queene Aeleonor, Wife to King Henry the Third, Mar∣chiones de Marchia Walliae, &c. that is, The Marquesses of the Marches of Wales, (or Lord Marchers) Iohn Fitz-Alane, Raulph Mortimer, Iohn of Monmouth, and Walter Clifford, in the name of the Marches, The Canopy said it was the right of the Marches to finde silver speares and to bring them for to support the foure square purple silke cloth at the Coronation of Kings and Queenes of England. But the happy tranquillity of peace betweene Wales and Eng∣land, and the Kings authority hath by little and little abrogated all those royalties, prerogatives, and priviledges, which the Lords Marchers enjoyed, and insolently exercised over the poore Inhabitants in the Marches. Neither yet doe I thinke (I thought good to say so much afore-hand) that all this Country belonged anciently to the CORNAVII, but that part onely which is on this side Severn: as for that on the farther side of Severn, it pertained to the OR∣DOVICES, who inhabited heere a great Country in this Tract: a parcell where∣of, as also some little Territories on this side Severn, which belonged unto the Lords Marchers, 27. Hen. 8. were not long since laid to this Shire by authority of the Parliament. For, into these two parts the whole Shire may bee fitly divided, seeing that the Ri∣ver Severn cutteth it through in the mids from the West to the South-East. In that part beyond Severn, the River Temd, in British Tifidia c, for some space maketh the South limite, Clun River into which at length the River Colun, in British Colunwy, and called contractly Clun, issueth it selfe. This River Clun breaking forth farther within the Country, Bishops not farre from a prety Towne well frequented, named Bishops Castle, (because it belonged to the Bishops of Hereford whose Dioecese and jurisdicti∣on is large in this Shire) giveth name to Coluno ca strum. Clun Castl Clun Castle: which, the Fitz Alans de∣scended from one Alan the sonne of Flaold a Norman (who were afterwards Earles of Arundell ) built, when they were Lords Marchers against the Welshmen, and annoyed them with continuall inrodes into their Country. But where it meeteth with Temd, among divers doubtfull Fourds, there mounteth up an Hill of a very ancient memory, which they call Caer Caradoc, because about the yeere of our Sal∣vation 53. Caer Caradoc. King Caratacus, Tacitus. Caratacus a most noble and renowned British King, raised in the front of it a mighty Wall or Rampire of stone, and with his people resolutely made it good against Ostorius Lieutenant for the Romanes and the Legionary Romane Souldiers. Untill the Romans having forcibly broken through that fence of stones so rudely laid, (the remaines whereof are to be seene at this day) forced the unarmed Britans, to quit the place, and Hie up to the mountaines. Caratacus himselfe notwithstan∣ding escaped by flight, but his wife, daughter, and brethren were taken prisoners: And he afterwards, (as adversity in no place findeth safety) being delivered into the hands of Ostorius by Queene Cartismandua (unto whose protection he had committed himselfe) was carried away to Rome, after he had vexed and wearied the Romanes in a long and troublesome warre. Where hee obtained pardon for himselfe and his, of Claudius the Emperour, not by way of any base suppliant intreaty, but by a gene∣rous and honourable liberty of speech. For the winning of this hill and taking of this King captive, See the 43. and 44. page. it was decreed, that Ostorius should have Triumphall Ornaments: neither did the Senate judge the taking of Caratacus lesse honorable, than when Pub∣lius Scipio shewed Siphax, and L. Paulus presented Perses, two vanquished Kings in tri∣umphant manner at Rome. And although the compiler of our History hath made mention neither of this Warre, nor of this worthy Britan, yet the memory thereof is not quite gone with the common people. For, they confidently give out by tradi∣tion, that a King was discomfited and put to flight upon this hill: and in the British Booke entituled Triades, among three of the most renowned Britans for warlike ex∣ploits, Caradauc With the strong arme. Ludlow. Vrichfras is named first; so that, as I thinke, wee should make no doubt, but that he was this very Caratacus. Then Ludlow, in British formerly named Dinan, and in later ages Lys-twysoc, i. The Princes Palace, standeth upon an hill at the meeting of the same Temd with the River Corve, a Towne more faire than an∣cient. Roger Montgomery first laid unto it a Castle no lesse beautiful, than strong, which hangeth over Corve, and then raised a Wall about the Towne that taketh a∣bout a mile in compasse. But when his sonne Robert was attainted, King Henry the First kept it in his owne hands: and afterwards, when it was besieged, it valiant∣ly endured the assaults of King Stephen: and during that streight siege, Henry sonne of the King of Scots, Iron hookes. 1139. being plucked from his saddle with an iron hooked engine, had like to have beene haled violently within the Towne wals, had not Stephen in person rescued him, and with singular valour delivered him from so great a danger. After this, King Henry the Second gave this Castle together with the Vale under∣neath along Corve, which commonly is called Corves-dale, to Sir Foulque of Dinan. Afterwards it belonged to the Lacies of Ireland, and by a daughter fell to Sir Geffrey de Ienevile a Poictevin, Jenevile. or, as some will have it, of the house of Lorain: from whose heires it descended againe by a daughter to the Mortimers, and from thence here∣ditarily, to the Crowne. Then the Inhabitants in processe of time, built in the very bosome of the Towne, and on the highest ground a very faire Church, and the one∣ly Church they have. And so it beganne to be of great account and to excell other neighbour Townes adjoyning. And although by King Stephen, Simon Montfort, and King Henry the Sixth it suffered much damage in the civill Warres, yet it alwayes flourished againe: and now especially, ever since that King Henry the Eighth or∣dained the Councell of the Marches, The Councell in the Mar∣ches. not unlike to those Parliaments in France: the Lord President whereof doth for the most part keepe Courts and Terme here: which a man could hardly have seene at any time without Suites, whether it were for the great state and authority that it carryed, or because the Welshmen are so forward and hote to goe to Law. This Councell consisteth of the Lord President, so many Counsellers as it shall please the Prince to appoint, a Secretary, an Attorney, a Sollicitour, and the foure Iustices of the Counties in Wales. Burford. Somewhat lower, upon the River Temd, is seene Burford, which from Theodo∣ricke Saie and his Posterity, came unto Robert Mortimer, and from his posterity like∣wise unto Sir Geffrey Cornwaile, Cornwaile. who derived his Descent from Richard Earle of Cornwall and King of the Alemans: and his Race even unto these daies hath flou∣rished under the name of Barons of Burford (but not in the dignity of Parliamentary Barons) whereas it is holden (as we reade in the Inquisition) of the King for to finde five men for the Army of Wales, Inquis. 40. Ed. 3 and by service of a Baronie. As for those (that I may note thus much by the way) who held an entire and whole Barony, they were com∣monly in times past reputed Barons; and as some learned in our common lawes are of opinion, Baron and Ba¦rony Conju∣gata. Baron and Barony, like as Earle and Earledome, Duke and Dukedome, King and Kingdome, were Conjugata, that is, Originally yoke-fellowes. When Temd now is leaving Shropp-shire behinde it, not farre from the bankes thereof, there raise themselves up Northward certaine hils of easie ascent, Cleehill. Cleehill they call them, much commended for yeelding the best Barly in great plenty, neither are they without iron mines: at the descent whereof, in a Village called Cleybury, Hugh Mortimer built a Castle, which King Henry the Second forthwith so rased (because it was a nour∣sery of sedition) that scarce there remaine any tokens thereof at this day: also hard by standeth Kinlet where the Blunts flourished. Blunt in the Norman lan∣guage signifi∣eth yellow haire of the head. Bridg-North. Their name in this Tract is very great, so sirnamed at first of their yellow haire; the Family noble and ancient, and the branches thereof farre spread. Then saw we on the right hand banke of Severn, Brug Morfe (commonly, but corruptly called Bridg-North, ) so called of Burg or Bur∣rbugh, and Morfe, a Forest adjoyning, whereas before time it was named simply Burgh. A Towne, fortified with wals, a ditch, a stately Castle, and the Severn, which betweene the Rockes runneth downe with a great fall: seated also upon a Rocke, out of which the waies leading into the upper part of the Towne were wrought out, Achelfleda Lady of the Mercians first built it, and Robert de Belesme Earle of Shrewes∣bury walled it: who, trusting to the naturall strength of the place rebelled against King Henry the First, like as afterward Roger Mortimer against King Henry the the Second: but both of them with ill successe; for they were both forced to yeeld, and submit themselves, absolutely to the Kings command. At the Siege of this Castle, (as we reade in our Annales) King Henry the Second being levelled at with an arrow, had beene shot therewith quite through the body, had not Sir Hubert Syncter a noble and trusty Servitour to the King interposed himselfe, De Saneta Clara. and to save the King received both the arrow and his deaths wound withall. Before time also Sir Raulph de Pichford bare himselfe so valiantly heere, that king Henry the First gave unto him the little Burgh hard by, Lib. Inquis. To hold by service, for to finde dry wood for the great chamber of the Castle of Burgh against the comming of his Soveraigne Lord the King. Willey or Willeley. Willeley or Willey is not farre from hence, the habitation in old time of Sir Warner De Willeley, from whose Posterity by the Harleis and Peshall, it came to the notable Family of Lacon ; advanced by marriage long since with the heire of Passelew, and of late by the Possession of Sir I. Blunt of Kinlet. There be in like manner other Townes and Castles heere and there in this Tract, as Newcastle, Lib. Inquis. Hopton Castle, Shipton, and upon the River Corve, Corvesham, which Walter Clifford had by the gift of king Henry the Second, also Brancroft and Holgot, com∣monly Howgate: which belonged sometime to the Manduits, then, to Robert Blunt Bishop of Bath, Wenlock. and afterwards to the Lovells. More higher, are Wenlocke, now knowne for the lime, but in king Richard the Seconds time for a mine of Copper there: William Malmesbury. But much more knowne in the Saxons dayes for a most ancient Nunnery, where Milburga that most holy virgin lived in great devotion, and was entombed: the which Nunnery Earle Roger de Montgomerie repaired and replenished with Monkes. Or Wivell. In later times Sir Iohn Winell, called also Wenlocke because he heere inhabi∣ted, * for his faithfull service to king Henry the Sixth, was by him advanced to the state and honor of Baron Wenlocke, Lord Wen∣locke. and elected knight of the Garter; in whose cause he manfully lost his life in the Battaile of Tewkesbury, leaving no issue: but from his cozin and heire generall the Lawleys of this County are lineally descended. A little more West is Acton Burnell, Claus. 17. Edw. 4. a Castle of the Burnels, and after of the Lovels, made famous by the Court of Parliament there held in the time of king Edward the First. This Family of the Burnells was in old time of great name and antiquity, Acton Burnel very much enriched also by that Bishop aforenamed. But it failed and had an end in the Raigne of Edward the Second, when Mawde the heire was married unto John Lovell first, and secondly to John Haudlow, whose sonne Nicholas assumed to himselfe the name of Burnell: from whom the Ratcliffes Earles of Sussex and others draw their pedegree. Scarce a mile from hence standeth Langley, Langley. seated very flat and low in a Parke full of Woods, the dwelling place of the Leas, which may well challenge to be ranged a∣mong the Families that are of the better worth and greater Antiquity in this Tract. Next unto these is Condover, Condover. a Manour sometimes of the Lovells, but of late, the pos∣session of Thomas Owen, Iustice of the Common Pleas and a very great lover of learning. But he hath now taken his quiet sleepe in Christ, and left his sonne Sir Roger Owen ; for his manifold learning, a right worthy sonne of so good a father. This is holden of the King, as we reade in the Records, In chiefe, to finde two footmen one day in the army of Wales, in time of warre. Which I note heere once for all, to this end, that I may give to understand, that Gentlemen and Noblemen heereabout held their inheritances of the Kings of England by this tenure, to be ready in service with Souldiers for de∣fence of the Marches, whensoever there should be any warre betweene England and Wales. Pichford. Neere unto this, there is a little Village named Pichford, that imparted the name in times past to the ancient Family of Pichford: A fountaine of Pitch, or Birumen. now the Possession of R. Oteley, which our Ancestours (for that they knew not pitch from Bitumen ) so called of a fountaine of Bitumen there in a private mans yard; upon which there riseth and swimmeth a kinde of liquid Bitumen daily, skumme it off never so diligently, even as it doth in the Lake Asphaltites in Iewry, in a standing water about Samosata, and in a spring by Agrigentum in Sicilie. But whether this bee good against the falling sick∣nesse, and have a powerfull property to draw, to close up wounds, &c. as that in Iewry, none that I know as yet have made experiment. More Westward, you may see Pou∣derbach Castle, Pouderbach. now decayed and ruinous, called in times past Pulrebach the seat of Sir Raulph Butler a younger sonne of Raulph Butler Lord Wem, from whom the But∣lers of Woodhall in Hertford-shire are lineally descended. Beneath this, Huckstow Fo∣rest, spreadeth a great way among the mountaines: where, at Stipperstons bill there be great heapes of stones, Stipperstons. and little rockes as it were, that rise thicke together: the Or Welsh∣men. Britans call them Carneddau tewion. But whereas as these seeme naturall I dare not with others so much as conjecture, that these were any of those stones which Giraldus Cambrensis seemeth to note in these words: Harald in person being himselfe the last footeman in marching with footemen, and light Armours, and victuals answerable for ser∣vice in Wales, valiantly went round about and passed through all Wales, so as that he left but few or none alive. And for a perpetuall memory of this Victory, you may finde very many stones in Wales erected after the antique manner upon hillockes, in those places wherein hee had beene Conquerour, having these words engraven. HIC FVIT VICTOR HARALDVS. Heere was Harald Conquerour. Caurse. Routon. More Northward, Caurse Castle standeth, which was the Barony of Sir Peter Cor∣bet ; from whom it came to the Barons of Stafford: and Routon Castle neere unto it, the most ancient of all the rest, toward the West borders of the Shire, not farre from Severn, which Castle sometimes belonged to the Corbets, and now to the ancient Fa∣mily of the Listers. Before time it was the possession of Iohn le Strange of Knocking ; in despite of whom Lhewellin Prince of Wales laid it even with the ground, as we read in the life of Sir Foulque Fitz-Warin. It flourished also in the Romans time under the same name, Rutunium. tearmed by Antonine the Emperour, RUTUNIUM. Neither can wee mistake herein, seeing both the name and that distance from URICONIUM a towne full well knowne, which he putteth downe, doe most exactly agree. Neere unto this are Abberbury Castle and Watlesbury, which is come from the Corbets to the notable family of the Leightons Knights. As for the name, it seemeth to have taken it from that High Port-way called Watling street, which went this way into the farthest part of Wales (as Ranulph of Chester writeth) by two little Townes, of that street called Strettons: betweene which in a valley, are yet to be seene the rubbish of an old Ca∣stle called Brocards Castle, Brocards Castle. and the same set amiddest greene medowes, that before time were fish-pooles. But these Castles with others which I am scarce able to num∣ber and reckon up, for the most part of them are now ruinate not by the fury of warre, but now at length conquered even with secure peace, and processe of time. Now crossing over Severne unto that part of the shire on this side the River, which I said did properly belong to the ancient CORNAVII. This againe is divided after a sort into two parts by the river Terne running from the North Southward: so called, for that it issueth out of a very large Poole in Stafford-shire, such as they of the North parts call Tearnes. In the hither part of these twaine, which lyeth East, neere to the place where Terne dischargeth his waters into Severn stood the ancient URICONI∣UM (for so Antonine the Emperor termeth it) which Ptolomee calleth VIROCONIUM, Uriconium. Ninnius, Wroxcester. Caer Vruach, the old English Saxons , wee Wreckceter and Wroxcester. This was the chiefe City of the CORNAVII, built as it seemeth by the Romans, what time as they fortified this banke of Severn in this place where the river is full of fourds, as it is not elsewhere lower toward the mouth thereof. But this be∣ing sore shaken in the Saxons warre, fell to utter decay in the Danish broiles: and now it is a very small country Towne of poore Husbandmen, and presenteth often times to those that aire the ground, Roman Coines, to testifie in some sort the anti∣quity thereof. Besides them I saw nothing of antiquity but in one place some few parcels of broken walles (which the common people call The old worke of Wroxceter ) This Wall was built of rough stone distinguished outwardly with seven rowes of British brickes in equall distance, and brought up with arched worke inwardly. I conjecture, by the uneven ground, by the Rampires and the rubbish of the wall heere and there on either side, that the Castle stood in that very place where these ruines remaine. But where the plot of the City lay (and that was of a great com∣passe) the Soile is more blackish than elsewhere, and plentifully yeeldeth the best barley in all this quarter. Beneath this City that Port-way of those Romans, knowne by the name of Watling street, went, as I have heard say, directly (albeit the ridge thereof now appeareth not) either through a fourd or over a Bridge (the founda∣tions whereof were of late, a little higher, discovered, when they did set a Weare in the River) unto the Strattons, Strattons. that is to say, Townes upon the Streete, whereof I spake even now. The ancient name of this decaied URICONIUM, sheweth it selfe very apparently in an hill loftily mounting neere thereunto, Wreken-hill. called Wreken hill (some Writers terme it Gilberts hill ) from the top whereof, which lyeth in a plaine pleasant levell, there is a very delightfull prospect into the Country beneath on every side. This Hill runneth out in length a good space, as it were attired, on the sides, with faire spread trees. But under it, where Severn rolleth downe with his streame, at Buldewas, Bildas. commonly Bildas, there flourished a faire Abbay, the Sepulture in times past of the noble Family of the Burnels, Patrons thereof. Higher into the Country there is a Mansion or Baiting Towne named Watling street of the situation upon the foresaid Rode way or street. Dalaley. And hard by it are seene the Reliques of Castle Dalaley, which after that Richard Earle of Arundell was attainted, King Richard the Second by authority of the Parliament annexed to the Principality of Chester, which hee had then erected. And not farre from the foote of the foresaid Wreken, in an hollow Valley, by that high street before mentioned, Oken-yate, a little Village well knowne for the plenti∣full delfe there of pit-cole, lieth so beneath, and just at the same distance as Antonine placeth VSOCONA both from URICONIUM and also from PENNOCRUCIUM that no man need to doubt, Usocona. Oken-yate. but that this Oken-yate was that USOCONA. Nei∣ther doth the name it selfe gainesay it: for, this word Ys, which in the British tongue signifieth Lowe, may seeme added for to note the low situation thereof. On the other side, Charleton. beneath this Hill, appeareth Charleton Castle, in ancient times belonging to the Charletons, Lords of Powis: and more Eastward next of all unto Staffordshire, Tong-Castle, called in old time Toang, Tong. which the Vernons not long since repaired, as also the College within the Towne, which the Pembridges, as I have read, first founded. Nei∣ther have the Inhabitants any thing heere more worth shewing, than a Bell for the bignesse thereof very famous in all those parts adjoyning. Hard to this, lieth Albrigh∣ton, which in the Raigne of King Edward the First, was the seat of Sir Raulph de Pich∣ford, but now of the Talbotts, branched from the Family of the Earles of Shrewesbury. But above Tong was Lilleshul Abbay in a woodland Country, founded by the family of Beaumeis, whose heire was marryed into the house of De La Zouch. But seeing there is little left but ruines, I will leave it and proceed forward. Beyond the river Terne, Draiton. on the brinke thereof standeth Draiton, where in the civill warres between the houses of Lancaster and Yorke, a field was fought that cost many a Gentleman of Cheshire his life. 1459. For they, although the battaile was given up almost on even hand, when they could not agree among themselves but tooke part with both sides, were slaine by heapes and numbers on either side. Beneath this Draiton, and nere enough to Terne, lieth Hodnet, wherein dwelt sometimes Gentlemen of the same name, Inq. 2.10. E. 2. from whom hereditarily it is come by the Ludlows unto the Vernons. It was held in times past, of the Honour of Mont-Gomery, by service, to bee Seneschall or Steward of the same Honour. After this, Terne, having passed ha d by certaine little rurall Townes, taketh in unto him the Riveret Roden, and when hee hath gone a few miles further, neere unto Uriconium, of which I spake even now, falleth into the Se∣vern. Upon this Roden, whiles hee is but new come from his spring head, standeth Wem, Wem. where are to be seene the tokens of a Castle long since begun there to be built. This was the Barony, after the first entry of the Normans, of William Pantulph, from whose Posterity it came at length to the Butlers, and from them by the Ferrars of Ousley, and the Barons of Greystock, unto the Barons D'acre of Gillesland. Within a little of this, upon an high hill well wooded, or upon a cliffe rather which some∣time was called Radcliffe, stood a Castle mounted aloft, called of the reddish stone Red-Castle, Red-castle. and in the Normans language Castle Rous, the seat in old time of the Aud∣leies, through the liberall bounty of Lady Maude Le Strange. But now there re∣maineth no more but desolate walles, which yet make a faire shew. Scarce a mile from hence lyeth all along the dead carcasse, as it were, of a small City now well neere consumed. But the peeces of Romane money, and those brickes which the Romans used in building there found, doe testifie the antiquity, and founders there∣of. The neighbour Inhabitants use to call it Bery, as one would say Burgh, and they report that it was a most famous place in King Arthurs daies, as the common sort ascribe whatsoever is ancient and strange to King Arthurs glory. Morton Cor∣bet. Then, upon the same River Morton Corbet, anciently an house of the Family of Turet, afterward a Castle of the Corbets, sheweth it selfe, where within our remem∣brance, Robert Corbet, carryed away with the affectionate delight of Architecture, began to build in a barraine place a most gorgeous and stately house, after the Itali∣ans modell: But death prevented him, so that he left the new worke unfinished and the old Castle defaced. These Corbets are of ancient Nobility in this Shire, and held Lordships by service, of Roger Montgomery Earle of this County, about the comming in of the Normans, for Roger the son of Corbet held Huelebec, Hundeslit, Acton, Fern∣leg, &c. Robert, Corbet, a forename. the sonne of Corbet, held land in Ulestanton, Rotlinghop, Branten, and Udecot. And in later ages this family farre and fairely propagated received encrease both of revenew and great alliance by the marriage of an heire of Hopton. * More Southward standeth Arcoll the habitation of the Newports knights of great wor∣ship, descended from the Barons Grey of Codnor, and the Lords of Mothwy: and neere unto it is Hagmond Abbay, which the Lords Fitz Alanes if they did not found, yet they most especially endowed. Not much lower upon Severn standeth most pleasantly the famousest City (for so it was called in Domesday booke ) of this Shire (risen by the ruine of Old Uriconium ) which wee at this day call Shrewsbury and Shrowsbury, having mollified the name, Shrewsbury. whereas our Ancestours called it , for that it was anciently a very thic∣ket of shrobs upon an hill. In which sense both the Greekes tearmed their Bessa, and our Welsh Britans named this also Pengwerne, that is, The high plot planted with Al∣ders, and a Palace so named continued heere a long time. But whence it is that it is called now in the British tongue Ymwithig, and by the Normans Scropesbery, Sloppes¦bery, and Salop, and in the Latin tongue Salopia, I am altogether ignorant, unlesse it should bee the ancient name Scobbes-beng diversely distorted and dis-jointed. Yet some skilfull in the British tongue, thinke verily it is called Ymwithig, as one would say, Placentia or Plaisance, of a British word Mewithau, and that their Poets the Bardi so named it, because of all others, it best pleased the Princes of Wales in times past. It is seated upon an Hill of a reddish earth, and Severn, having two very faire Bridges upon it, gathering himselfe in manner round in forme of a circle, so com∣passeth it, that were it not for a small banke of firme land, it might goe for an Island. And thence it is that Leland the Antiquarian Poet wrote thus: Edita Penguerni latè fastigia splendent, Urbs sita lunat veluti mediamnis in orbe, Colle tumet modico, duplici quoque ponte superbit, Accipiens patriâ sibi linguâ nomen ab alnis. The buildings high of Shrewsbury doe shine both farre and nere, A Towne within a River set, an Island as it were, Mounted upon a prety hill, and Bridges hath it twaine, The name it tooke of Alder trees in British tongue they sayne. Neither is it strengthned onely by nature, but fortified also by art: for Roger of Montgomery, unto whom by the Conquerors gift it was allotted, pulling downe 50. houses or thereabout, built a strong stately Castle on the North side upon a rising rocke, and Robert his son when hee revolted from King Henry the First, walled it a∣bout, on that side where it was not fensed with the River, which notwithstanding never, that I know of, suffered assault or hostility but once in the Barons Warre a∣gainst King John. At the first entring of the Normans it was a City well inhabited and of good trade. For, as we reade in Domesday booke, In King Edward the Confessors time it paid Gelt according to an hundred Hides: In the Conquerours time, it paid yeerely seven pounds and sixteene shillings de Gablo: They were reckoned to bee two hundred and fifty two Citizens: whereof twelve were bound to watch about the Kings of England when they lay at this City, and as many to accompany them when they went forth on hunting. Which I would verily thinke to have beene ordained, because not many yeeres before Edricke Streona Duke of the Mercians, a man notoriously disteined with wicked∣nesse, lay in wait heere for Prince Ashelm, and slew him as he rode on hunting. At which time (as that Booke sheweth) the custome was in this City, That a woman taking, howsoever it were, a husband, if she were a widdow, gave unto the King twenty shillings; if a maide, tenne, in what manner soever she tooke a man. But to returne unto our matter, the said Earle Roger not onely fortified it, but also adorned it with other buildings both publique and private, yea and founded a very goodly Abbay to the honour of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, unto which he granted many Possessions, and therewith, Saint Gregories Church, And namely in that tenour, (I exemplifie the words out of the pri∣vate History of the said Abbay) That when the Chanons who held Prebends therein should any of them die, Prebend pas∣sing heredita∣rily. the said Prebends should come unto the Demaine and Possession of the Monkes. Whereupon arose no small controversie: For, the sonnes of the said Cha∣nons sued the Monkes at Law, that they might succeed in their fathers Prebends. For, at that time, the Chanons and Priests in England were married, and it grew to be a custome, that Ecclesiasticall livings should descend by inheritance to the next of the bloud. But this controversie was decided under King Henry the First, and concluded it was, that the heire should not succeed in Ecclesiasticall Livings; yea and about that time lawes were enacted touching the single life of Priests. Soone after in processe of time, other Churches also were heere erected. For, to say no∣thing of the houses or Frieries of Dominicans, Franciscans, and Augustine Friers, which the Charletons, Jenevils, and Staffords founded, there were two Collegiat Churches erected, Saint Chadds with a Deane and ten Prebendaries, and Saint Maries with a Deane likewise and nine Prebendaries. And even at this day, a faire and goodly City it is, well frequented and traded, full of good merchandise, and by reason of the Citizens painfull diligence, with cloth making and traffique with Welshmen, rich and wealthy. For, hither, almost all the commodities of Wales, doe conflow as it were to a common Mart of both Nations. Whereupon it is inhabited both with Welsh and English speaking both languages: who among other things deserve e∣speciall commendation for this, in that they have set up a Schoole for the training up of children, wherein were more Schollers in number, when I first saw it, than in any one Schoole throughout all England againe: unto which Thomas Aston the first head Schoolmaster a right good man procured by his meanes a very honest Salarie and Stipend for the Teachers. It shall not now I hope bee impertinent to note, that when diverse of the Nobility conspired against King Henry the Fourth with a pur∣pose to advance Edmund Mortimer Earle of March to the Crowne, * as the undoubt∣full and right heire, Battaile of Shrewsbury. 1463. whose father King Richard the Second had also declared heire apparent: and Sir Henry Percy called Hote-spurre then addressed himselfe to give the assault to Shrewsbury: upon a suddaine all their designes were dashed, as it were, from above. For the King with speedy marches was upon his backe before hee ima∣gined. To whom yet the young Hote-spurre with courageous resolution gave bat∣taile, and after a long and doubtfull fight, wherein the Scotishmen, which follow∣ed him, shewed much manly valour, (when the Earle of Worcester his Unckle, and the Earle of Dunbar were taken) hee despairing of Victory ran undaunted upon his owne death amiddest the thickest of his enemies. Of this battaile the place is called Battaile-field. Battailefield. Where the King after Victory erected a Chappell and one or two Priests, to pray for their soules, who were there slaine. As for the position of this Shrewsbury, it is from the Islands Azores twenty Degrees, and seven and thirty mi∣nutes distant in Longitude, and from the Aequinoctiall Line two and fifty Degrees and three and fifty minutes in Latitude. From out of this city (I wot not whether it may be thought worth my labour, or pertinent to my purpose to relate so much) brake forth the last time, namely in the yeere of our Salvation 1551. The British sweat, or swea∣ting sicknesse. that dismall disease, The English Sweat, which pre∣sently dispersed over the whole Realme, made great mortality of people especially those of middle age: for, as many as were taken suddenly with this Sweat, with∣in one foure and twenty houres either dyed or recovered. But a present remedy was found, namely that such as in the day time fell into it, should presently in their clothes as they were goe to bed; if by night and in bed, should there rest, lye still and not stirre from thence for foure and twenty houres: provided alwayes, that they should not sleepe the while but by all meanes bee kept waking. Whereof this disease first arose, the learned of Physicians know not for certaine. Some strangers ascribe it to the ground in England, Hieronymus Fracastorius. standing so much upon plastre (and yet it is but in few places of that nature.) In certaine moist Constitutions of weather (say they) it happeneth that vapours arise out of that kinde of Soile, which although they bee most sub∣tile, yet they are corrupt▪ which cause likewise a subtile contagion, and the same is proportio∣nate either unto the spirits or to the thinne froth that floateth upon the bloud. But whatsoever the cause is, no doubt there is an Analogie betweene it and the subtile parts of bloud: by rea∣son whereof within one day the Patient either mends or ends. As for the cause let others search: for mine owne part, I have observed that this malady hath runne through England thrice in the age aforegoing; and yet I doubt not, but long before also, it did the like (although it were not recorded in writing:) first, in the yeere of our Lord 1485. in which King Henry the Seventh began his Raigne, a little after a great conjunction of the superior Planets in Scorpio. A second time yet more mildly, al∣though the plague accompanied it, in the thirtie three yeere after, anno 1518. upon a great opposition of the same Planets in Scorpio and Ta rus, at which time it plagued the Netherlands and high Almaine also. Last of all, three and thirtie yeeres after that, in that yeere 1551. when another conjunction of those Planets in Scorpio tooke their effects. But perhaps I have insisted too long herein; for, these may seeme vaine toies to such as attribute nothing at all to celestiall influence, and learned experience. Neere unto this Citie, Severne fetcheth many a compasse, turning and winding in and out, but specially at Rossall, where hee maketh such a curving reach that hee commeth well neere round and meeteth with himselfe. Heere about is that most an∣cient kinde of boat in very great use which in the old time they called in Latine Rates commonly, Flotes. to wit, Flotes, certaine peeces of timber joyned together with rough plankes and raf ers running overthwart, which serve to convey burdens downe the River with the streame: the use and name whereof our countrimen have brought from Rhene in Germanie, and tearme them as the Germans doe Flores. By the River side, stand Shrawerden, Shrawerden. a Castle sometime of the Earles of Arundell, but afterwards, belonging to Sir Thomas Bromley, Knocking. late Lord Chancellor of England: Knocking Ca∣stle, built by the Lords Le Strange, from whom it descended hereditarily unto the Stanleies Earles of Darbie ; Nesse. and neere unto it Nesse, over which there mounteth up right a craggie cliffe, with a cave much talked of: which together with Cheswarden, King Henry the Second gave unto John Le Strange ; Barons Le Strange. from whom by divers bran∣ches are sprung the most Honorable families of the Stranges de Knocking, Avinde∣legh, Ellesmere, Blackmere, Lutheham and Hunstanston in Norfolke. Now from those of Knocking, 20. Ed. 4. when as the last died without any issue male, the inheritance descen∣ded by Joan a sole daughter, and the wife of George Stanley, unto the house of Darby. Farther from the River, Oswestre. even upon the West frontier of the shire, lieth Oswestre, or Oswaldstre, in British Croix Oswalds, a little Towne enclosed with a ditch and a wall, fortified also with a pretie Castle: and in it there is great trafficke, especially of Welsh Cottons of a slight and thin webbe, Welsh Cor∣tons. which you may call in Latine Leviden∣sas, whereof there is bought and sold heere every weeke great store. It hath the name of Oswald King of the Northumbers (whereas before time it was called Ma∣serfield ) whom Penda the Pagan Prince of the Mercians both slew heere in a bloudy battaile, 642. and after he had slaine him, with monstrous cruelty tare in peeces. Whence a Christian Poet of good antiquity versified thus of him. Cujus & abscissum caput, abscissosque lacertos, Oswald slaine. Et tribus affixos palis pendere cruentus Penda jubet: per quod reliquis exempla relinquat Terroris manifesta sui, regemque beatum Esse probet miserum: sed causam fallit utrámque. Ultor enim fratris minimè timet Oswius illum, Imò timere facit: nec Rex miser, imò beatus Est, qui fonte boni fruitur semel & sine fine. Whose head and limbs dismembred thus, that bloudy Penda takes, And causeth to be hanged up, fast fixed on three stakes: His meaning was hereby to strike a terror to the rest, And make him seeme a wretched wight, who was a King much blest. But this his purpose fail's in both. Oswy, his brother deare, In his revenge was not afraid, but rather makes him feare: Nor miserable is this Prince, but happy we may say, Who now enjoy's the spring of good, and shall enioy for aye. This Towne seemeth to have had the first originall from devotion and religion: for, See in Norht∣humberland. the Christians of that age, counted it a most holy place; and Bede hath recorded, that here where Oswald was slaine, strange miracles have been wrought. But Madoc brother of Mereduc (as Caradoc of Lancarvan writeth) built it, and the Norman Fitz-Allans, who were Lords afterwards thereof, and Earles of Arundell, walled it about▪ The Ecclipses of the sunne in Aries have been most dangerous unto it: Ecclipses in Aries. for, in the yeers of our Lord 1542. and 1567. when the Ecclipses of the sunne in Aries wrought their effects, it suffered very grievous losse by fire. And namely after this later Ec∣clipse, the fire spread it selfe so far, that there were burnt within the Towne and sub∣urbs about two hundred houses. A little beneath this Northwestward there is an hill entrenched round about with a threefold ditch (they call it Hen-Dinas, that is, The old palace ) The neighbour dwellers say confidently, it hath been a Citie: but others there be that thinke it was the Camps of Penda, or Oswald. Scarce three miles from hence standeth Whittington, Whittington. a Castle not long agoe of the Fitz-Guarins, who deduced their pedegree from Sir Guarin de Metz, a Loraineis: but he tooke to wife the daugh∣ter and heire of William Peverell, who is reported to have built Whittington, and be∣gat Fulke the Father of that most renowned Sir Fulke Fitz-Warin, The life of Fulke, written in French. of whose doubt∣full deedes and variable adventures in the warres our Ancestours spake great won∣ders, and Poems were composed. In the reigne of Henry the Third, I finde that licence was granted unto Foulk Fitz-Warin to strengthen the Castle of Whittington, in competent manner, as appeareth out of the Close rolles in the fifth of King Henry the Third. The dignity of these Barons Fitz-Warins, Barons Fitz∣warin. had an end in an heire Female, and in the age aforegoing passed by Hancford unto the Bourchiers now Earles of Bath. Beneath this Whittington, one Wrenoc sonne of Meuric held lands, who for his service ought to be Latimer, Latimer what it signifieth. that is, Truchman or Interpreter, betweene the English and the Welsh∣men. This note I out of an old Inquisition, that men may understand what the said name Latimer importeth: which no man almost knew heretofore, and yet it hath been a surname very currant and rise in this kingdome. At the North-west border of this shire, there offer themselves to be seene, first Shenton the seat of the respe∣ctive familie of the Needhams; White-Church. Album Mona∣sterium. Blackemere an ancient Manour of the Lords Le Strange ; and then Whitchurch, or Album Monasterium, where I saw some Monuments of the Talbots, but principally of that renowned English Achilles Sir John Talbot the first Earle of Shrewsbury out of this house: whose Epitaph, that the reader may see the forme of the Inscriptions, according to that age, I will here put downe, although it is little beseeming so worthy and heroicall a Knight. ORATE PRO ANIMA PRAENOBILIS DOMINI, DO∣MINI JOANNIS TALBOTT QVONDAM COMITIS SALOPIAE, DOMINI TALBOTT, DOMINI FURNI∣VALL, DOMINI VERDON, DOMINI STRANGE DE BLACK-MERE, ET MARESCALLI FRANCIAE, QUI OBIIT IN BELLO APUD BURDEVVS. VII. IULII, M.CCCC.LIII. That is: Pray for the Soule of the right Noble Lord, Sir John Talbot, some∣times Earle of Shrewsburie, Lord Talbot, Lord Furnivall, Lord Verdon, Lord Strange de Black-Mere, and Mareshall of France: Who died in the battaile at Burdews. VII. IULII, M.CCCC. LIII. Unto this Family of the Talbots there accrued by marriage-right the inheritance of the Barons Le Strange of Blackmere, who were surnamed Le Strange commonly, and Extranei in Latine records, for that they were strangers brought hether by King Hen∣rie the Second, and in short time their house was far propagated. These of Blackmere were much inriched by an heire of W. de Albo-monasterio, or this Whit-Church, and also by one of the heires of John Lord Giffard of Brimsfield, of ancient Nobility in Glocester-shire, by the onely daughter of Walter Lord Clifford. More Westward lieth Ellesmer a little territorie, Ellesmer. 1205. but rich and fruitfull, which, as the Chronologie of Chester testifieth, King John gave with the Castle, to Lhewellin Prince of North-Wales in marriage, with Joane his base daughter. Afterwards in the time of King Henry the Third it came to the Family of the Stranges. But now it hath his Baron Sir Thomas Egerton, Baron of Elles∣mer. a man whom for his singular wisdome and sin∣cere equity Queene Elizabeth chose to be Lord Keeper of the great Seale, and King Iames making him Lord Chancellour advanced to the highest Honour of the long roabe, and withall adorned with the Honorable title of Baron of Ellesmer. Now let us briefely adde somewhat of the Earles of Shrewsbury: Earles of Shrewsbury. Roger de Belesmo, otherwise, Montgomery, was created the first Earle of Shrewsbury by King William the Conquerour, unto whom he allotted also the greatest part of this Shire. After him succeeded first, H. Huntingdot in his booke of the miseries of life. his eldest sonne Hugh, slaine in Wales without issue. Then Ro∣bert another of his sonnes, a man outragiously cruell toward his owne sonnes and hostages, whose eyes with his owne hands he plucked out and gelded. But afterwards being convict of high Treason, he was kept in perpetuall prison by King Henry the first, and so suffered condigne punishment for his notorious wickednesse. Then was his Earledome made over unto Queene Adeliza for her dowry. Many ages after, King Henry the Sixth in the 20. yeere of his reigne, promoted to this honour Iohn Lord Talbot, whom both Nature bred, and his disposition inured unto warlike pro∣wesse. And in the 24. yeere of his reigne he bestowed moreover upon the same Iohn, See in Ireland whom in the Patent he calleth Earle of Shrewsbery, and of Weisford, the title of Earle of Waterford, the Barony of Dongarvan, and the Seneschalsie or Stewardship of Ire∣land. But when he was slaine at Castilion upon Dordon neere Burdeaux together with his younger sonne Sir John Talbot Vicount L'isle, after he had foure and twenty yeeres together marched with victorious armes over a great part of France; his sonne Iohn by the daughter and one of the heires of Sir Thomas Nevill Lord Furnivall, succee∣ded: who siding with the house of Lancaster was slaine fighting valorously in the forefront of the battaile of Northampton. From him by a daughter of the Earle of Ormond came Iohn the third Earle of Shrewsbury, and Sir Gilbert Talbot Captaine of Callis, from whom the Talbots of Graston descended. This third Iohn had by his wife Katherine daughter to H. Duke of Buckingham, George the fourth Earle, who ser∣ved King Henry the Seventh valiantly and constantly at the battaile of Stoke. And he by Anne his wife, daughter of William Lord Hastings, had Francis the fifth Earle who begat of Mary daughter to Thomas Lord Dacre of Gillesland George the sixth Earle, aman of approoved fidelity in weighty affaires of State, whose sonne Gilbert by his wife Gertrud daughter to Thomas Earle of Rutland, the seventh Earle main∣taineth at this day his place left unto him by his ancestours, with right great honour and commendation for his vertues. In this region there are Parishes much about 170. CESTRIAE Comitatus-(Romanis Legionibus-et Colonijis olim insignis) vera et. obseluta descriptio CHES-SHIRE. T HE fifth and last of those Countries, which in old time the CORNAVII held, is the County of CHESTER; in the Saxons Tongue , commonly CHES-SHIRE, and The County Palatine of Chester, (for that the Earles thereof had Royalties and princely Priviledges be∣longing to them; and all the Inhabitants owed Allegeance and fealty to them, as they did to the King.) As for this tearme Palatine, County Pala∣tine. that I may rehearse againe, that which I have said before of this name, was in times past common to all those, who bare a∣ny Office in the Kings Court or Palace: and in that age Comes Palatinus, was a Title of Dignity conferred upon him who before was Palatinus, Petr. Pitbaus in the description of Campaine. with authority to heare and determine Causes in his owne Territory; and as well his Nobles, whom they called Barons, as his Vassals were bound to repaire to the Palace of the said Count, both to give him advise and also to give their attendance, and furnish his Court with their presence. This Country (as William of Malmesbury saith) Is scarce of Corne, Joh. Tilius. but especially of Wheat, yet plentifull in Cattaile and fish. Howbeit Ranulph the Monke of Chester, affir∣meth the contrary: Whatsoever Malmesbury dreamd (saith hee) upon the relation of o∣thers, it aboundeth with all kinde of victuals, plenteous in Corne, flesh, fish, and salmons espe∣cially, of the very best: it maintaineth trade with many commodities, and maketh good re∣turne. For why, in the Confines thereof it hath salt pits, mines, and metals. And this more∣over will I adde: the grasse and fodder there, is of that goodnesse and vertue, that cheeses bee made heere in great number of a most pleasing and delicate taste, The most com∣mendable Cheeses. such as all England againe affordeth not the like; no, though the best dayriwomen other∣wise and skilfullest in cheese making be had from hence. And whiles I am writing this, I cannot chuse but mervaile by the way at that which Strabo writeth, That in his time some Britans could not skill of making Cheese: and that Plinie afterwards wonde∣red: That barbarous Nations, who lived of milke, either knew not or despised, for so many ages, the commodity of Cheese, who otherwise had the feat of crudding it to a pleasant tart∣nesse, and to fat bu yr. Whereby it may be gathered, that the devise of making Cheese came into Britaine from the Romans. But howsoever this Region in fertility of soile commeth behinde many Countries in England, yet hath it alwaies bred and reared more Gentry than the rest: For, you have not in all England againe any one Pro∣vince beside, that in old time either brought more valorous Gentlemen into the field, or had more Families in it of Knights degree. On the Southside it is hemmed in with Shropp shire, on the Eastside with Stafford-shire and Darby-shire, on the North with Lancashire, and on the West, with Denbigh and Flint-shires. Toward the North-West it runneth farre into the sea with a long cantle Wirrall. or Promontory, which being enclosed within two Creekes receiveth the Ocean on both sides entring into the land: into which two Creekes also all the Rivers of this Shire doe discharge themselves. Into that Creeke which is more Westerne passeth the River Dee that di∣videth the country from Denbigh-shire: into that on the Eastside, both Wever, which runneth through the mids of the Shire, and Mersey also, that parteth it from Lanca∣shire, issue themselves. Neither see I any better way of describing this County, than if I follow the very tracts of these Rivers. For, all the places of greatest note, are situate by the sides of them. But before I enter into any particular description, I will first propose out of Lucian the Monke, thus much in commendation of Ches-shire: for he is a rare Author and lived a little after the Conquest. If any man be desirous (saith hee) either fully, Lucian the Monke, of the praise of Chester. or as neere as may bee, to treat of the Inhabitants, according to the disposition of their manners, in respect of others that live in sundry places of the Realme. They are found to bee partly different from the rest of English, partly better, and partly equall unto them. But they seeme especially (the best point to bee considered in generall triall of manners) in feasting freindly, at meat cheerefull, in giving entertaiment liberall, soone angry, but not much, and as soone pacified, lavish in words, impatient of servitude, mercifull to the affli∣cted, compassionate toward the poore, kinde to their kinred, spary of their labour, void of dis∣simulation and doublenesse of heart, nothing greedy in eating, farre from dangerous pra∣ctises, yet by a certaine licentious liberty, bold in borowing many times other mens goods. They abound in Woods and pastures, they are rich in flesh and Cattaile, confining on the one side upon the Welsh Britans, and by a long entercourse and transfusion of their manners, for the most part like unto them. This also is to be considered, in what sort the Country of Che∣ster enclosed upon one side with the limite of the Wood Lime, by a certaine distinct privi∣ledge from all other Englishmen is free, and by the Indulgences of Kings and Excellencies of Earles hath beene wont in Assemblies of the people to attend upon the Earles sword rather than the Kings Crowne: and within their precinct to heare, and determine the greatest mat∣ters with more liberty. Chester it selfe is a place of receit for the Irish, a neighbour to the Welsh, and plentifully served with Corne by the English: Finely seated, with Gates anciently built, approoved in hard and dangerous difficulties. In regard of the River and prospect of the eye together, worthy according to the name to be called a City: garded with watch of holy and religious men, and, through the mercy of our Saviour, alwaies fensed and fortified with the mercifull assistance of the Almightie. Deva. The River The River Dee. Dee, called in Latin Deva, in British Dyffyr-dwy, that is, the water of Dwy, breeding very great plenty of Salmons, ariseth out of two fountaines in Wales; and thereof men thinke it tooke the name: for Dwy in their tongue signifieth Two. Yet others, observing also the signification of the word, interpret it Black-water, o∣thers againe, Gods water, or Divine water. But although Ausonius noteth that a Spring hallowed to the Gods was named Diuvona in the ancient Gaules tongue (which was all one with the British) and in old time all Rivers were reputed, Divona. , that is, Descen∣ding from Heaven, yea and our Britans yeelded divine honour unto Rivers, as Gildas writeth, yet I see not why they should attribute Divinity to this River Dwy above all others. The Thessalians, as we reade, gave to the River Paeneus divine honour, for the pleasantnesse thereof; the Scythians to Danubius for the largenesse; the Germans to Rhene because it was counted a judge in the question of true and undefiled wedlocke: But wherefore they should impose a divine name upon this River I see no reason, as I said before, unlesse peradventure, because now and then it changed the Chanell, and thereby foreshewed a sure token of Victory to the Inhabitants upon it, when they were in hostility one with another, according as it inclined more to this side or to that, after it had left the Chanell: for, thus hath Giraldus Cambrensis recorded, who in some sort beleeved it: Or else, because they observed that contrary to the wonted manner of other Rivers, upon the fall of much raine it arose but little, and so often as the South winde beateth long upon it, it swelleth and extraordinarily overfloweth the grounds adjoyning. Peradventure also the Christian Britans thought the water of this River to be holy: For, it is written, that when they stood ready to joyne battaile with the English Saxons and had kissed the earth, they dranke also very devoutly of this River, in memoriall of Christs most sacred and pretious bloud. But, Dee which seemeth to rush rather than to run out of Wales, no sooner is entred into Cheshire but he passeth more mildely with a slower streame by BONIUM, Bonium. in some written co∣pies of Antonine, BOVIUM, a City that had been of great name in that age, and af∣terward a famous Monastery. Of the Chore or quire whereof, it was called by the Britans Bon-chor and Banchor, Banchor. of the ancient English , and Banchor, and among many good and godly men, it fostered and brought up (as some write) that most wicked Arch-heretick Pelagius, who injuriously derogating from the grace of God, troubled a long time the West Church with his pestiferous Doctrine. Pro∣sper Aquitanus in this Verse of his, termeth him the British Adder, or Land-snake. Pestifero vomuit coluber sermone Britannus. A British Snake, with venemous tongue, Hath vomited his poison strong. Neither have I made mention of him for any other reason, but because it is be∣hoveable to each one to know vices and venims. In this Monastery, as saith Bede, There was such a number of Monkes that being divided into seven portions, which had eve∣ry of them a severall head and Ruler over them, yet every one of these had no fewer than three hundred men who were wont to live all of their handy labour, Of whom Edilfred King of the Nordan-humbers slew 12. hundred, because they had implored in their prayers Christs assistance for the Christian Britans against the English-Saxons, Monkery. then infidels. The profession of this Monasticall life (that I may digresse a little) began, when Pagan Tyrans enraged against Christians pursued them with bloudy persecu∣tions. For then good devout men, that they might serve God in more safety and se∣curity, withdrew themselves into the vast Wildernesses of Aegypt, Rutilius Claudius. and not (as the Painims are wont with open mouth to give it out) for to enwrap themselves wil∣lingly in more miseries because they would not be in misery. Where they scattered themselves among Mountaines and Deserts, living in caves and little cells heere and there in holy meditations. At first solitary and a∣lone, whereupon in Greeke they were called Monachi, that is, Monkes: but after they thought it better (as the sociable nature of mankinde required) to meete together at certaine times to serve God, and at length they beganne to cohabite and live toge∣ther for mutuall comfort, rather than like wilde beasts to walke up and downe in the Deserts. Their profession was to pray, and by the labour of their owne hands, to get living for themselves, and maintenance for the poore, and withall they vowed pover∣ty, obedience and chastity. Athanasius first brought this kinde of Monkes consisting of Laymen into the West Church. Whereunto after that Saint Austen in Africke, Saint Martin in France, and Congell in Britaine and Ireland had adjoyned the function of Regular Clergy: It is incredible, how farre and wide they spred, how many and how great Coenobies were built for them, so called of their communion of life; as also Mo∣nasteries, for that they kept still a certaine shew of solitary living: and in those daies none were more sacred and holy than they, and accordingly they were reputed; considering how by their praiers to God, by their example, Doctrine, labour, and in∣dustry, they did exceeding much good not onely to themselves, but also to all man∣kinde. But as the world grew worse and worse, so those their holy manners, as one said, rebus cessere secundis, that is, Gave backward in time of prosperity. Now let mee re∣turne unto my matter, craving your pardon for this short digression. After these dayes, this Monastery fell utterly to ruine; That Banchor of which Saint Bernard spea∣keth in the life of Malachie was in Ireland for, in the time of William of Malmesbury who lived presently after the Normans comming in, There remained heere, as hee saith, so many tokens of Antiquity, so many walles of Churches halfe downe, so many windings and turnings of Gates, such heapes of rubbish and rammell, as hardly a man should have found elsewhere. But now is left to bee seene scarcely the face and out∣ward shew of a dead City or Monastery, and the names only remaine of two Gates Port Hoghan and Port Cleis, which stand a mile asunder, betweene which are found very oft peeces of the Romans money. Bonium or Ban¦chor is of Flint¦shire. But, that I may tell you of one thing, this Bo∣NIUM or Banchor is not reckoned within this County but in Flintshire ; a peece where∣of severed (as it were) from the rest lyeth heere betweene Cheshire and Shropp-shire. Dee, where he entreth first into this shire seeth above him not farre from his banke, Malpas, upon an high hill: which had in it a Castle; and for the bad, narrow, and combrous way was termed in Latin Mala platea, that is, Ilstreet, and thence also tooke this later name Mal-pas from the Normans, Out of the Rol of Domesday of Chel-shire, Barons of Mal-pas. whereas in times past the Englishmen, almost in the very same sense, called it Depenbach. The Barony hereof Hugh Earle of Chester gave to Robert Fitz-Hugh: In the Raigne of Henry the Second, William Patricke the sonne of William Patricke held the same: of whose line Robert Patricke standing outlawed, lost it. After some few yeeres David of Mal-pas by Per breve re∣cognitionis. a Writ of Recognisance, gat the one halfe of that Towne which was Gilbert Clerkes: But a great part of this Barony went afterwards hereditarily to those Suttons that are Barons of Dudley: and a part also thereof came to Urian Sampier. And from Philip a youn∣ger sonne of David of Mal-pas, is descended that worshipfull family of the Egertons, who tooke this name from the place of their habitation: like as from other places, diverse Gentlemen of this Race received their sirnames Cotgrave, Overton, Codington, and Golborn. As touching the name of this place, give mee leave before I depart hence, in this serious worke, to insert a prety jest out of Giraldus Cambrensis. It hap∣ned, saith hee, in our dates, that a certain Jew travailing towards Shrewsbury, with the Archdeacon of this place, Itinerar. lib. 2. cap. 13. whose sirname was Peche, that is, Sinne, and a Deane named Devill; when he heard by chance the Archdeacon telling, That his Archdeaconry beganne at a place called Il-street, and reached as farre as to Mal-pas toward Chester: Hee conside∣ring and understanding withall as well the Archdeacons sirname as the Deanes, came out with this pleasant and merry conceit, Would it not bee a wonder (quoth hee) and my fortune very good, if ever I get safe againe out of this country, where Sinne is the Archdeacon, and the Devill the Deane; where the entry into the Archdeaconry is Il-street, and the going forth of it, Mal-pas. Shoclach. From hence Dee runneth downe amaine by Shoclach, where sometime was a Castle, by Aldford, belonging in times past to the Arderns ; by Poulefourd, where in the Reigne of Henry the Third, Sir Raulph of Ormesby had his Castle, and by Ea∣ton the seat of the famous Family of Gros-venour, Gros-venour. that is, The great Hunter, whose posterity now corruptly goe under the name of Gravenor. Somewhat higher, upon the same River neere unto Dee-mouth, which Ptolomee calleth SETEIA for Deia, standeth the noble City which the said Ptolomee na∣med DEUNANA, Deunana. Deva. Antonine the Emperour DEVA, of the River, the Britans Caer-Legion, Caer-Leon Vaur, Caer-Leon ar Dufyr Dwy, and by way of excellency Caer, like as our Ancestours, the English Saxons , of the Legions Campe, and wee more short, Chester. West-Chester, of the West situation, and simply Chester, accor∣ding to the Verse. Cestria de castris nomen quasi Castria sumpsit. Chester of Castria tooke the name, As if that Castria were the same. For these British names, without all doubt were derived from the Twentieth Le∣gion named Victrix: This Legion in the yeere that Galba the Emperour was the se∣cond time Consull, together with Titus Vinius, was transported over into Britaine which being out of awe and therefore dreaded of the Lieutenants, as well those which had beene Consuls as Pretours, had Julius Agricola appointed Lieutenant o∣ver it by Vespasian the Emperour; was at length placed and seated in this City which I suppose was not built many yeeres before, and set as one would say at the backe of the ORDOVICES, to restraine them: although there are some, who avouch it to be of greater antiquity, as they say than the Moone: as founded forsooth by Leon-Vaur the Giant, I know not how many hundred yeeres before. But the very name it selfe might give the checke unto these triviall Antiquaries, and withhold them from so grosse an errour. For, they cannot deny, but that Leon-Vaur in British signifieth A great Legion. Now, whether it stands more with reason and equity, that a City should take name of a Great Legion, than of Leon a Giant, let the learned judge; see∣ing, that in the part of Spaine called Tarraconensis, there is a Realme now called Leon of the seventh Legion Germanica ; considering also, that the twentieth Legion, which they tearmed Britannica, Valens Victrix, and some falsely Valeria Victrix, abode in this City, as Ptolomee, Antonine, and the ancient Coine of Septimius Geta doe prove: by which, it appeareth for certaine, that this City also was a Colony: For, in the re∣verse or back-side thereof standeth this Inscription COL. DIUANA LEG. XX. VICTRIX. Chester, a Colony of the Romans. But to testifie the Romanes magnificence, there are remaining indeed at this day very few tokens, beside pavements of foure square checker worke: how∣beit in the former ages it presented many: which, Ranulph a Monke of this City shall tell you out of his Polychronicon in these his owne words. There be waies heere un∣der the ground vaulted marveilously with stone worke, chambers having arched roofes over head, huge stones engraven with the names of ancient men: heere also are sometimes digged up peeces of money coined by Julius Caesar and other famous persons, and stumped with their in∣scriptions. Likewise Roger of Chester in his Policraticon, When I behold (saith he) the ground worke of buildings in the streetes laid with monstrous big stones, it seemeth that it hath beene founded by the painfull labour of Romans or Giants, rather than by the sweat of Britans. This City built in forme of a quadrant, foure square, is enclosed with a wall that taketh up more than two miles in compasse, * and hath eleven parishes. But that of S. Johns with∣out the Northgate was the fairest, being a stately and solemne building, as appeareth by the remaines, wherein were anciently Prebendaries, and, as some write, the Bishops See. Neere unto the River standeth the Castle upon a rocky hill, built by the Earles: where the Courts Palatine, and the Assises, as they call them, are kept twice a yeere. The houses are very faire built and along the chiefe streets are galleries or walking places, The Rowes. they call them Rowes having shops on both sides, through which a man may walke dry from one end unto the other. But it hath not continued evermore in one tenor of prosperity. First it was rased by Egfrid King of Northumberland, then by the Danes, yet reedified againe by Aedelfled Lady of the Mercians: and soone after it saw King Eadgar in magnificent maner triumphing over the British Princes. For, Marianus Scotus. sit∣ting himselfe in a Barge at the fore-decke, Kennadie King of the Scots, Malcoline King of Cumberland, About the yeere. Macon King of Mann and of the Islands, with all the Princes of Wales brought to doe homage, 960. and like watermen working at the Ore, rowed him a∣long the River Dee, in a triumphant shew, to his great glory and joy of the beholders. Certaine yeeres after, and namely about the yeere of our Redemption 1094. when as in a devour and religious emulation, as one saith, Princes strove avie, That Cathedrall Churches and Minsters should bee erected in a more decent and seemely forme, Churches re∣paired. Rodulphus Glaber. and when as Christendome rouzed as it were her selfe, and casting away her old habiliments, did put on every where the bright and white robe of Churches; Hugh the first of the Norman bloud, that was Earle of Chester, repaired the Church which Earle Loefrick had for∣merly founded in honour of the Virgin Saint Werburga, and by the advise of Anselm, whom he had procured to come out of Normandy granted the same unto Monkes. And now, it is notorious for the Tombe of Henry the Fourth, Emperour of Al∣maine, who as they say gave over his Empire and lived heere an Eremits life; and for the Bishops See, therein established. Which See immediately after the Nor∣mans Conquest, Peter Bishop of Lichfield, translated from Lichfield hither: but when it was brought to Coventry, and from thence into the ancient seat againe, West-Chester lay a long time berest of this Episcopall Dignity, untill in our fathers dayes King Henry the Eighth, having thrust out the Monkes, ordeined Prebendaries, and resto∣red a Bishopagaine, under whom for his Dioecesse he appointed this County, Lanca∣shire, Richmond, &c. and appointed the same to be within the Province of the Arch∣bishop of Yorke. But returne wee now to matters of greater antiquity. When as now the said Cathedrall Church was built, the Earles that were of the Normans line, fortified the City both with Walles and Castle. For as the Bishop held of the King that which belongeth to his Bishopricke (these are the words of Domesday booke made by King William the Conquerour) so the Earles with their men held of the King wholly, all the rest, of the City. It paid Geld or Tribute for fifty hides: and foure hundred and thirty and one houses were thus Geldable: and seven Mint-masters. When the King himselfe in person came thither every Carrucata yeelded unto him two hundred Hestas, and one turn full of Ale, and one Rusca of butyr. And in the same place, for the reedification of the City wall and the bridge, the Provost gave warning by an edict, that out of every hide in the Coun∣ty one man should come: and looke whose man came not, his Lord or Master was sined in for∣ty shillings to the King and the Earle. If I should particulate the scufflings and skirmi∣shes heere about betweene the Welsh and the English in the beginning of the Nor∣mans time, their inrodes and outrodes, the often scarfires of the Suburbs of Hanbrid beyond the Bridge, whereupon the Welshmen call it Treboeth, that is, The burnt towne, as also the Wall made there of Welshmens skuls that went a great length, I should seeme to forget my selfe and thrust my sicle into the Historians Harvest. But ever since the said time, hath Chester notably flourished, and King Henry the Seventh made it a County by it selfe incorporate. Neither wanteth any thing there that may be required in a most flourishing City, but that the Ocean being of∣fended and angry (as it were) at certaine Mills in the very chanell of the River Dee, hath by little withdrawne himselfe back, and affoordeth not unto the City the com∣modity of an Haven, as heretofore. The Longitude of this place is twenty Degrees and three and twenty Scruples: the Latitude three and fifty Degrees and eleven Scruples. If you desire to know more touching this City, have here these reports out of Lucian that Monke abovesaid, who lived almost five hundred yeeres agoe. First, it is to bee considered, that Chester is built as a City, the site whereof inviteth and allureth the eye, which being situate in the West parts of Britaine, was in time past a place of receipt to the Legions comming a farre off to repose themselves, and served sufficiently to keepe the Keies, as I may say, of Ireland, for the Romanes, to preserve the limite of their Empire. For, being opposite to the North-East part of Ireland, it openeth way for passage of ships and Mariners with spread saile passing not often but continually to and fro, as also for the commodities of sundry sorts of Merchandise. And whiles it casteth an eye forward into the East; it looketh toward not onely the See of Rome and the Emperor thereof, but the whole world also: so that it standeth forth as a kenning place to the view of eyes: that there may bee knowne valiant exploites, and the long traine and consequents of things; as also whatsoever throughout the world hath beene done by all persons, in all places, and at all times: and what ever hath beene all done may also bee avoided and taken heed of. Which City having foure Gates from the foure cardinall Windes on the East side, hath a prospect toward India, on the West toward Ireland, North-Eastward the greater Norway, and Southward that streight and narrow Angle, which divine severity, by reason of ci∣vill and home-discords, hath left unto the Britans. Which long since by their bitter vari∣ance have caused the name of Britaine to bee changed into the name of England. Over and beside, Chester hath by Gods gift a River to enrich and adorne it, the same faire and fishfull, hard by the City Walles: and on the South side a rode and harbour for shippes comming from Gascoine, Spaine, and Germany, which with the helpe and direction of Christ, by the labour and wisedome of Merchants, repaire and refresh the heart of the City with many good things: that wee being comforted every way by our Gods Grace, may also drinke Wine often, more frankely and plenteously: because those Countries enjoy the fruite of the Vineyards aboundantlie; Moreover the open Sea ceaseth not to visite it every day with a Tide, which according as the broad shelves and barres of sands are opened or hid∣den by Tides and Ebbes incessantly, is wont more or lesse, either to send or exchange one thing or other, and by his reciprocall Flow and returnes, either to bring in or to carry out somewhat. From the City, North-Westward, there shooteth out a languet of land, or Pro∣montory of the maine land into the Sea, enclosed on the one side with Dee mouth, on the other side with the River Mersey: Wirall. wee call it Wirall: the Welsh Britans, for that it is an Angle, tearme it Kill-gury. In old time it was all forest and not in∣habited, as the Dwellers report, but King Edward the Third disforested it: Yet now, beset it is with Townes on every side: howbeit more beholding to the Sea than to the Soile: for, the land beareth small plenty on Corne, the water yeeldeth great store of fish. At the entry into it on the South side standeth Shotwich a Ca∣stle of the Kings, upon the salt water: Upon the North standeth Hooten, a Man∣nour, which in King Richard the Second his time, came to the Stanleies, who fetch their Pedegree from Alane Silvestre upon whom Ranulph the first of that name, Earle of Chester, conferred the Bailly-wick of the Forest of Wirall, by delivering unto him an horne. Close unto this is Poole, from whence the Lords of the place that have a long time flourished, tooke their name: and hard by it Stanlaw, as the Monkes of that place interprete it, Law, what it is. A Stony hill: where John Lacy Connestable of Chester foun∣ded a little Monastery, which afterward by reason of inundations was translated to Whaley in Lancashire. 1173. In the utmost brinke of this Promontory, lieth a small, hungry, barren, and sandy Isle, Il-bre. called Il-bre, which had sometime a little Cell of Monkes in it. More within the Country and Eastward from Wirall, you meet with a famous Forest, named the Forest of Delamere, the Foresters whereof by hereditary succ ssion, are the Dawns of Vtkimon, descended of a worshipfull stocke, from Ranulph de Kingleigh, unto whom Ranulph the first, Earle of Chester gave that Forestership, to bee held by right of in∣heritance. In this Forest Aedelfled, the famous Mercian Lady, built a little City called , that is, by interpretation, Happy Towne, which now having quite lost it selfe hath likewise lost that name, and is but an heape of rubbish and rammell, which they call, The Chamber in the Forest. And about a mile or two from hence, are to bee seene the ruines of Finborrow, Finborrow. another Towne built by the same Lady Aedelfled. Through the upper part of this Forest the River Wever runneth, which ariseth out of a Poole in the South side of the Shire at Ridly, Ridly. the dwelling house of the wor∣ship ull Family of the Egertons: who flowered out of the Barons of Melpas, as I have said. Neere hereunto is Bunbury contractly so called for Boniface Bury, for Saint Boniface was the Patron Saint there, where the Egertous built a College for Priests. Over against which is Beeston which gave sirname to an ancient family, and where up∣on a steepe rising hill, Beeston. Beeston Castle towereth aloft with a turretted wall of a great cir∣cuit. This Castle the last Ranulph Earle of Chester built: whereof Leland our Countri∣man being rapt both with a Poeticall and Propheticall fury, writeth thus. Assyrio rediens victor Ranulphus ab orbe, Hoc posuit Castrum terrorem gentibus olim Vic uis, patriaeque suae memorabile vallum. Nunc licet indignas patiatur fracta ruinas, Tempus erit quando rursus caput exeret altum, Vatibus antiquis si fas mihi credere vati. When Ranulph from Assyria return'd with victory; As well the neighbour Nations to curbe and terrifie, As for to sense his owne Country, this famous Fort he rais'd, Whilom a stately things, but now the pride thereof is raz'd. And yet though at this present time, it be in meane estate With crackes and breaches much defac'd, and fouly ruinate; The day will come when it againe the head aloft shall heave, If ancient Prophets I my selfe a Prophet, may beleeve. But to returne to the River, Wever first holdeth his course Southward, not farre from Woodhay, Woodhay. where dwelt a long time that family of the Wilburhams knights in great reputation; Bulkley. also by Bulkeley and Cholmondley which imparted their names to wor∣shipfull houses of knights degree; not farre off on the one hand from Baddeley the ha∣bitation in times past of the ancient Family de Praerijs: of the other, from Cumber∣mer, in which William Malbedeng founded a little religious house. 1134. Where this River commeth to the South limit of this Shire, it passeth through low places; wherein, as also els where, Trees under g ound. the people finde oftentimes and get out of the ground, trees that have lien buried, as it is thought, there, ever since Noahs floud. But afterwards, wa∣tering fruitfull fields, he taketh to him out of the East a riveret by which standeth Wib∣benbury, so called of Wibba, King of the Mercians. Hard to it lie, Hatherton, the seat in old time of the Orbetes, then of the Corbetts, but now of the Smithes; Dodinton, the possession of the Delvesies; Batherton, of the Griphins; Shavinton of the Wodenoths (who by that name may seeme to have descended from the English Saxons) beside the places of other famous Families wherewith this County every where aboun∣deth. From thence runneth Wever downe by Nant-wich, Saltpits. not farre from Middle∣wich, and so to Northwich. These are very famous Salt-wiches, five or sixe miles distant asunder, where brine or salt water is drawne out of Pittes, which they powre not upon wood while it burneth; as the ancient Gaules and Germans were wont to doe, but boyle over the Fire, to make Salt thereof. Neither doubt I, that these were knowne unto the Romanes and that form hence was usually paied the Custome for salt called Salarium. For, there went a notable high way from Middlewich to Northwich, raised with gravell to such an height, that a man may easily acknowledge that it was a worke of the Romanes, seeing that all this Coun∣try over, gravell is so scarce: and from thence at this day it is carryed to private mens uses. Matthew Paris writeth, that King Henry the Third stopped up these Salt-pits, when in hostile manner he wasted this Shire: because the Welshmen, so tumultu∣ous in those dayes, should not have any victuals or provision from thence. But when the faire beames of peace beganne once to shine out, they were opened a∣gaine. Nantwich, Nantwich. which the River Wever first visiteth, is reputed the greatest and fairest built Towne of all this Shire after Chester, the Britans call it Hellath wen, that is, The white Wich, or Salt pitte, because the whitest salt is there boiled: and such as writ in Latine named it Vicus Malbanus, haply of one William named Malbe∣deng and Malbanc, unto whom, at the Normans Conquest of England, it was allot∣ted. It hath one onely Salt pitte, they call it the Brine pitte, about some foure∣teene foote from the River, out of which they convey salt water by troughes of wood into houses adjoyning, wherein there stand little barrels pitched fast in the ground, which they fill with that water, and at the ringing of a bell, they beginne to make fire under the leades; whereof they have sixe in every house, and there∣in seeth the said water: then certaine women, they call them Wallers, with little wooden rakes fetch up the salt from the bothom, and put it in baskets, they call them Salt barowes, out of which the liquor runneth, and the pure salt remaineth. The Church (and but one they have) is passing faire, and belonged, as I have heard, unto to Abbay of Cumbermer: from hence, Wever holding on his course crooked enough, is augmented with a brooke comming out of the East, which runneth downe from Crew, a place inhabited in old time by a notable family of that name. And far∣ther yet from the West side of the River, Calveley. Calveley sheweth it selfe, which gave both habitation and name to the worthy Family of the Calveleys, out of which in the Raigne of Richard the Second, Sir Hugh Calveley Knight, was for his Chivalry in France so renowned, that there occurred no hardy exploit but his prowesse would goe through it. From thence Wever hieth apace by Minshall, the house of the Minshuls, Vale Royall. and by Vale Royall, an Abbay founded by King Edward the First in a most pleasant valley, where now dwelleth the ancient Familie of the Holcrofts, unto Northwich, Northwich. in British called Hellath Du, that is, The blacke salt pitte: where also very neere the brinke of the river Dan, there is a most plentifull and deepe Brine-pit, with staires made about it, by which they that draw water out of it in lether buckets, a∣scend halfe naked into the troughes, and powre it thereinto, by which it is carried in∣to the which houses, about which there stand on every side many stakes and piles of wood. Heere Wever receiveth into his Chanell the River Dan, whose tract and streame I will now follow. This Dan or more truly Daven, flowing out of those hilles which on the East side sever Staffordshire from Ches-shire, runneth along to CONDATE a towne mentioned by Antonine the Emperour, now called corruptly Congleton, the middle whereof the little brooke Howty, on the East side Daning-schow, and Northward Dan it selfe, water∣eth. And albeit this Towne for the greatnesse and frequency thereof, hath deserved to have a Major and six Aldermen, yet hath it but a Chappell and no more: and the same made of timber, unlesse it bee the quire and a little Towre-steeple, which ac∣knowledgeth Astbury about two miles off, her mother-Church: which verily is a ve∣ry faire Church, the West Porch whereof is equall in height to the very Church as high as it is, and hath a spire steeple adjoyning thereto. In the Church-yard lie two portraictures of Knights upon Sepulchres, in whose Shields are two barres. But for that they be without their colours, hardly can any man say, whether of the Breretons, Manwarings or Venables, which are the most noble Families in those parts, and in∣deed such Barres doe they beare in their Coates of Armes, but in divers colours. Then commeth Daven to Davenport, commonly Damport, which hath adopted into her owne name a notable family: and Holmeschappell, a Towne well knowne to wai∣faring men: where within the remembrance of our Grandfathers, I. Needham built a Bridge: Neere unto which, at Rudheath there was sometimes a place of refuge and Sanctuary as well for the Inhabitants of this Shire as strangers, who had trespassed against the lawes; that there they might abide in security for a yeere and a day. Then runneth it under Kinderton the old seat of the ancient race of the Venables ; who ever since the first comming in of the Normans have been of name and reputation here, and commonly are called Barons of Kinderton. Beneath this, Southward, the little ri∣ver Croco runneth also into Dan, which flowing out of the Poole called Bagmere passeth by Brereton: which, as it hath given name to the worshipful, ancient and numerous family of the Breretons knights; so Sir William Brereton knight, hath of late added very much credit and honour to the place, by a magnificent and sumptuous house that hee hath there built. A wonder it is that I shall tell you, and yet no other than I have heard verified upon the credit of many credible persons, and commonly be∣leeved: That before any heire of this house of the Breretons dyeth, there bee seene in a Poole adjoyning, bodies of trees swimming for certaine daies together. Like unto that which Leonardus Vairus reporteth from the testimony of Cardinall Gran∣vell, namely, Lib. 2. de Fasci∣no. that neere unto the Abbay of Saint Maurice in Burgundy, there is a fish∣pond, in which are fishes put according to the number of the Monkes of that place: And if any one of them happen to bee sicke, there is a fish seene also to floate, and swimme above the water halfe dead: and if the Monke shall dye, the said fish a few daies before dieth. As touching these matters, if they bee true, I wrote not what to say: for, I am no Wisard to interpret such strange wonders; But these and such like things are done either by the holy trutelar Angels of men, Angels, Devils. or else by the devils who by Gods permissi∣on mightily shew their power in this inferiour world. For, both the sorts of them being intelligent natures, upon a deliberate purpose and to some certaine end, and not for nought, worke strange things. The Angels seeke after and aime at the safe∣ty and health of man-kinde: the devils contrariwise plot to mischieve, vexe, or else to delude them. But all this may seeme impertinent to our purpose. Croke the Riveret aforesaid, being past Brereton, within a while after visiteth Middlewich, Middlewich. neere unto his confluence with Dan, where there bee two Welles of sale water parted one from the other by a small Brooke; Sheatbes they call them: the one stands not open, but at certaine set times, because folke willingly steale the Water thereof, as beeing of greater vertue and efficacy. From hence run∣neth Dan to Bostoke, Bostock. in times past Botestoc, the ancient seat of the Family of the Bostokes Knights, which by the marriage with A ne onely Daughter of Raulph, sonne of heire to Sir Adam Bostokes knight, passed together with a very great live∣lode unto Sir John Savage. Out of this ancient house of the Bostokes, as out of a stocke, sprung a goodly number of the same name, in Ches-shire, Shropp-shire, Bark∣shire and elsewhere. When as Dan now, beneath Northwich that I spake of, hath united his steame with Wever, Pever. then Wever runneth forthright, and taketh in from the East, Pever, that floweth hard by Pever and giveth it the name: where, that ancient notable Family of Meinilwarin, commonly Manewaring is seated; out of which Raulph married the daughter of Hugh Kevelioc Earle of Chester, as appeareth by an old Charter in the custody of Ranulph the heire now of the samehouse. From thence speedeth Wever by Winington which gave both habitation and name to the renowned family of the Winingtons ; and not farre from Merbury, which being so called of a Mere under it, conferred likewise the name upon that respective ancient Family of the Merburies. Hence the River holdeth on his course neere un∣to Dutton, Dutton. the Inheritance of that great and worthy Family of Duttons, who derive their descent from one Hudard, allied to the Earles of Chester: and who by an old order and custome have great authority over all the pipers, fidlers, and minstrels of this Province, ever since that one of the Duttons a young Gentleman full of spirit and active withall, having hastily gathered a tumultuary power of those kinde of people, Chronicle of Walles. valiantly delivered Ranulph the last Earle of Chester from danger, when hee was beset with Welsh enemies. Neither must I passe over in silence Nether Whit∣ley in this tract, Towchet. out of which came the Tuschetts or Towchetts, who are now Barons Audley. By this time Wever aforesaid flowing betweene Prodesham a Castle of ancient note and Clifton, Rock-Savage. now Rock-Savage, an house of the Savages new built, who here by marriage attained to rich and faire revenewes; entreth at length into Mersey mouth. And this is so called of the River Mersey, which running as a bounder be∣tweene Ches-shire and Lancashire, is there at length discharged into the Sea, after it hath among other small townes of meaner note watered Stockport, which had some∣time a Baron, of the Earles of Chester, and Warburgton so named of S. Werburgh, the habitation of a family thereof sirnamed, but branched from the Duttons: Hereby it entertaineth the River Bollin out of that spacious Forest of Maclesfield. Upon this Bollin standeth Maclesfield one of the fairest Townes of this Country, Maclesfield. which gave name unto that Forest: where T. Savage, first Bishop of London, and afterwards Arch∣bishop of Yorke, built a College, wherein some of that Race of the Savages lye en∣tombed: also Dunham, which from Sir Hamon of Masey, by the Fittones and Venables descended hereditarily unto the Family of Booth. From thence Mersey commeth to Thelwall before it bee farre past Knotsford, that is, Canutus his Foord ; which is di∣vided into the upper and the nether: also to Lee ; from whence there is a Family bearing the same sirname, that is not onely of gentle bloud and of especiall note, but also farre and fairely propagated into a number of branches. Thelwall. As for Thelwall, now it is an obscure Village, but in times past a large Towne, built by King Edward the elder, and so called, as Florilegus witnesseth, of bodies of trees the boughes be∣ing cut off, firmely fastened in the ground wherewith hee walled it round. For the Saxons in their tongue called the Trunkes and bodies of Trees, , and a Wall, as wee doe now. Runkhorne. Elfled or Ethel∣fled At the very mouth of the River standeth Runkborne, founded in the same age by Lady Edelflede commonly called E fled, and brought now by the mutability of time to a few cotages. This lady Edelfleda (to tell you at once, of whom I have oft made mention) sister to K. Edward the elder, and wife to Ethelred a pe y King of the Mer∣cians, after her husbands death, governed the Mercians in most dangerous and trou∣blesome times, for eight yeeres, with high commendation: touching whom these laudatory Verses in praise of her, wee reade in the History of Henry of Huntingdon. O Elfleda potens, ô terror virgo virorum, Victrix naturae, nomine digna viri. Te, quo splendidior fieres, natura puellam, Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri. Te mutare decet, sed solam, nomina sexus, Tu regina potens, Rexque trophaea parans, Jam nec Caesarci tantum meruere triumphi, Caesare splendidior virgo virago, vale. O mighty Elfled, vigin pure, that men do'st terrifie, And nature passe, right worthy thou, in name, man to be. To grace thee more, dame Nature once thee shap'd a maiden brave, But vertue thee hath caused now the name of man to have. It thee becomes, but thee alone, the name of Sex to change: Of great Queenes and triumphant Kings thou standest in the range. From Caesars triumphes for desert thou bear'st away the bell, No Caesar ever was thy match: Thus, Manly-maide, fare well. Beneath Runckhorne, somewhat within the Country, Haulton, the Towne and Ca∣stle both shew themselves, which Hugh Lupus Earle of Chester gave unto Niel a Norman, to be by tenure and service Constable of Chester: by whose posterity, through the variable change of times, it is come unto the House of Lancaster. Neither would this be overpassed in silence, that William the said Nieles sonne, founded the Abbay adjoyning, at Norton, which now appertaineth to the Broks of ancient descent. Whe∣ther I should place in this Shire, or elsewhere the CANGI, an ancient Nation of Britans, that have beene so much and so long sought for, I have as long and as much doubted: For continuance of time hath now so obscured them, that hitherto by no footings they could be traced and found out. And albeit Justus Lipsius that Flower of exquisite learning taketh mee for a Judge heerein, I frankly confesse, I know not what judgement to give, and rather would I commend this office of judging to any other man, than assume it to my selfe. Yet neverthelesse, if CEANGI and CAN∣GI were the same, as why not? it may bee probable enough, that they were seated in this tract. For, whiles I perused these my labours, I understood by some of good credit, that there were heere upon the very shore gotten out of the ground twenty sowes of lead long in forme, but foure square: On the upper part whereof in an hollow surface is to be read this inscription. IMP. DOMIT. AUG. GER. DE CEANG. But on the other. IMP. VESP. VII. T. IMP. V. COSS. In the yeere of Christ 78. Which Monument seemeth to have beene erected for a Victory over the Cangi. Heereto maketh also the very site upon the Irish sea: Anno. 51. For, thus writeth Tacitus in the 12. booke of his Annales. Whiles Nero was Emperour; There was an Army led by Osto∣rius against the Cangi: the fields were wasted, booties raised every where, for that the enemies durst not come into the field: but if they attempted closely and by stealth to cut off the Army as it marched, they paid for their deceitfull cunning. Now were they no sooner come neere unto the Sea-Coast toward Ireland, but certaine tumults and insurrections among the Bri∣gantes, brought the Generall backe. But by the inscription abovesaid, it should seeme that they were not subdued before Domitians time: and then by computation of the times; when as that most warlicke Julius Agricola was Propretour in Britaine. Ptolo∣mee likewise placed the Promontory KARRAN N, that is, of the Cangi on this shore. Neither dare I seeke elsewhere than in this tract that Station CONGANII, where, in the declining estate of the Roman Empire, a Company or Band called Vigiles, that is, Watchmen, with their Captaine under the Dux Britanniae, kept watch and ward. Notwithstanding I leave to every man for mee his owne judgement heerein, as in all things else of this nature. Touching the Earles, that I may passe over the English Saxons, Earles only by office and not by inheritance: Earles of Chester. king William the first created Hugh sirnamed Lupus, son to the Vicount of Auranches in Normandy the first hereditary Earle of Chester and Count Palatine, and gave unto him and his heires all this County to be holden as freely by his sword, as the King himselfe held England by his Crowne (For these are the words of the Do∣nation:) who forthwith appointed under him these Barons, viz. Niele Baron of Haul∣ton, whose posterity afterwards tooke the name of Lacies, for that the Lacies inheri∣tance had fallen unto them, Barons to the Earles of Chester. and were Earles of Lincolne: Robert Baron of Mont-hault, Seneschall of the County of Chester, the last of whose line, having no issue, ordained by his last Will Isabel Queene of England, and John of Eltham Earle of Cornwall, his heires: William Malbedeng Baron of Malbanc, whose nephewes daughters, by marriage brought the inheritance to the Vernons and Bassets: Richard Vernon Baron of Ship∣broke, whose inheritance for default of heires males in the end came by the sisters un∣to the Wilburbams, Staffords, and Littleburies: Robert Fitz-Hugh Baron of Malpas, who, as it seemeth, dyed, as I said before, without issue: Hamon de Masey, whose pos∣sessions descended to the Fittons of Bollin: Gilbert Venables Baron of Kinderton, whose posterity in the right line have continued and flourished unto these our dayes: N. Ba∣ron of Stockeport ; to whom at length the Warrens of Pointon, budded out of the hono∣rable family of the Earles of Warren and Surry, in right of marriage succeeded. And these were all the Barons of the Earles of Chester that ever I could hitherto finde: Who, as it is written in an old Booke, Had their free Courts of all Plees and Suits or Complaints, except those Plees which belong unto the Earles sword. And their Office was, To assist the Earle in Councell, to yeeld him dutifull attendance, and oftentimes to repaire unto his Court for to doe him honor, and, as we finde in old parchment Re∣cords, Bound they were in time of warre in Wales, to finde for every Knights fee, one horse with caparison and furniture, or else two without, within the Divisions of Ches-shire: Also, that their Knights and Freeholders should have Corslets and Haubergella. Haubergeons, and defend their Lands and possessions. Foces by their owne bodies. After Hugh the first Earle beforesaid, succeeded Richard his sonne, who is his ten∣der yeeres perished by shipwracke, together with William the onely sonne of King Henry the First, and other Noblemen betweene Normandy and England in the yeere 1120. After Richard, succeeded Ranulph de Meschines, the third Earle, sonne to the sister of Earle Hugh: and left behinde him his sonne Ranulph, named de Gerno∣nijs, the fourth Earle of Chester, a Warlike man, and who at the Siege of Lincolne tooke King Stephen Prisoner. Hugh sirnamed Keveltoc, his sonne was the Fifth Earle; who died in the yeere 1181. and left his sonne Ranulph named de Blundevill the sixth Earle, who after he had built the Castles of Chartley and Beeston, and the Abbay also De la Cresse, died without children, and left foure sisters to be his heires, Maude the wife of David Earle of Huntingdon, Mabile espoused to William D' Albeney Earle of Arundell, Agnes married to William Ferrars Earle of Darby, and Avis wedded to Robert de Quin∣cy. After Ranulph the sixth Earle, there succeeded in the Earledome John sirnamed the Scot, the sonne of Earle David by the said Maude the eldest daughter. Who being de∣ceased likewise without any issue, King Henry the Third casting his eye upon so faire and large an inheritance, laid it unto the Domaine of the Crowne, and assigned other revenewes elsewhere to the heires: not willing, as the King himselfe was wont to say, that so great an estate should be divided among distaves. And the Kings them∣selves, in person, after that this Earledome came unto their hands, for to maintaine the honor of the Palatineship, continued here the ancient rights and Palatine priviled∣ges, and Courts, like as the Kings of France did in the County of Champan. After∣ward, this honour of Chester was deferred upon the Kings eldest sonnes, and first un∣to to Edward, King Henry the Third his sonne, who being taken prisoner by the Barons and kept in ward delivered it up for his ransome unto Simon Montford Earle of Leice∣ster: But when Simon was soone after slaine, it returned quickly againe unto the bloud Royall, and King Edward the Second summoned his eldest sonne, being but a childe, unto the Parliament by the Titles of Earles of Chester and Flint. Afterwards, King Ri∣chard the Secondary by authority of the Parliament, made it of an Earldome a Princi∣pality, and to the same Principality annexed the Castle of Leon with the territories of Bromfield and Yale, Chircke Castle with Chircke land, Oswalds-street Castle, the whole hundred and eleven townes belonging to that Castle, with the Castles of Isabell and Delaley, and other goodly lands, which, by reason that Richard Earle of Arundell stood then proscript and outlawed, had beene confiscate to the Kings Exchequer: and King Richard himselfe was stiled Prince of Chester: but within few yeeres after, that Title vanished away, after that King Henry, the Fourth had once repealed the Lawes of the said Parliament, and it became againe a County or Earledome Palatine: and at this day retaineth the jurisdiction Palatine: and for the administration thereof, it hath a Chamberlaine who hath all jurisdiction of a Chancellour within the said County Palatine, a Justice for matters in Common Plees, and Plees of the Crowne, to bee heard and determined in the said Country, two Barons of the Exchequer, Sergeants at Law, a Sheriffe, and Attourney, an Eschetour, &c. And the In∣habitants of the said County for the enjoying of their liberties were to pay at the change of every Owner of the said Earledome a summe of money (about 3000. markes) by the name of a Mize, as the County of Flint being a parcell thereof about 2000. markes, if I have not bin mis-informed. This County containeth about 68. Parishes. The King∣dome of the Mercians. NOw have I superficially surveyed the Regions of the COR∣NAVII, which together with the CORITANI, DOBUNI, and CATVELLANI, made that Kingdome in the Saxons Heptarchie, which they called , and , the Latine Writers Mercia of , an old English word, that signified a Limite ; for, all the other Kingdomes bordered and confined upon it. This was the largest Kingdome by farre of all the rest, begunne by Crida the Saxon, about the yeere of our Lord 586. augmented by Penda, who extended the Marches there of every way, and within a while after instructed in Christian Religion. But having come to the full period, within the revolution of 250. yeeres, fell at last, into the Dominion of the West-Saxons, after that the Danes had spoiled, weakned, and wasted it many yeeres in all manner of barbarous hostility. SILURES. I Thinke it now my best way, before I treat of the other parts of England, to digresse a while and turne a little aside toward Wales, called in Latin Cambria, or Wal∣lia, where the ancient Britans have yet their seat and a∣bode: neither shall I in so doing, as I thinke, digresse, but directly follow the order of nature. For, it lieth adjacent to the CORNAVII, and seemeth, as it were, of right and equity to demand, that it may be spoken of in due course and place: especially seeing the Britans or Welsh, the inhabitants thereof, enioy the same lawes and rights that we doe, and have long since beene engraffed and incorporate with us into our Common-wealth. WALES therefore, Wales. which name comprised in times past before the Con∣quest, the whole Countrey beyond Severn, but afterward reached not so farre, was when the Romanes ruled in Britaine, inhabited by three sorts of people, the SILURES, Silures. Dimetae. Ordovices. DIMETAE, and ORDOVICES. For, these held not onely the twelve Shires, as they call them, of Wales, but those two also beyond Severn, Hereford-shire, and Monmouth-shire, which have beene now long reckoned among the Counties of England. And to beginne first with those that we first come unto and which lye next unto us; the SILURES, according to Ptolomees description, inhabited those Regions which in Welsh are called by one name Deheubarth, that is, the Southpart, and at this day by new names, Hereford-shire, Radnor-shire, Brecknock-shire, Monmouth-shire, and Glamorgan-shire, wherein are as yet some remaines also of the name SILU∣RES. As for the derivation of that name, I have nothing that sorteth with the nature of the Nation. Tacitus. But touching the originall of the people, Tacitus ghesseth by their coloured faces, their countenances, their curled haire, and their situation over against Spaine, that they had their originall from the Spani∣ards: But Florianus del campo a Spaniard flatly affirmeth it, who troubleth and toileth himselfe exceedingly to finde the Silures in Spaine, and thrusts upon us, I know not what, of Soloria and Siloria in Biscaie. But to speake of the nature of these Silures : they were a Nation very great (for as wee may gather out of Plinie and Tacitus, they seeme to have possessed all South-Wales) fierce, valiant, given to warre, impatient of servitude, forward to adventure with a resolution (the Romanes call it Pervicacia ) and who would not bee brought in either with faire meanes or soule; in all and every of which qualities their Posterity have in no point as yet degenerated from their Ancestours. When the Romanes upon an ambitious desire of rule did set upon them, they trusting to the strength and prowesse of King Caratacus, provoked also and exasperated with a word that Claudius the Emperour let fall, who had said, These were so to bee destroied, and their name to bee extinguished as the Sugambri had beene rooted out aforetime, annoied the Romanes with so dangerous a Warre, by intercepting their Bands of auxiliary forces, by putting to flight that Legion over which Marius Valens was Captaine, and by wasting the lands of their Associates; that P. Ostorious Propraetor of Bri∣taine being tired with travaile and with the sense of these griefes and troubles gave up his ghost. Veranius also Governour under Nero, assailed them in vaine: For, whereas we reade in Tacitus; illum modicis excursibus sylvas populatum esse, that is, That he made spoile and forraied the woods with small outrodes ; reade in lieu of Sylvas, that is, woods, Siluras, that is, The Silures, as our friend that most learned Lipsius doth, and you shall reade aright. Yet was not this Warre husht and finished before the time of Ve∣spasian. For then, Iulius Frontinus subdued them by force, and kept them under with Bands of Legionary Souldiers. But whereas a Countriman of ours hath wrested this Verse of Iuvenal against Crispine, to these SILURES. magnâ qui voce solebat Silures mista∣ken for Siluros. Vendere municipes, fractâ de merce Siluros. who with lowd voice, was wont, and knew full well, Of broken ware, his country fish, the Sturgions for to sell. As though our Silures being taken prisoners were set to sale at Rome: upon my credite he hath not attained to the right and proper sense of the Poet: For by that word Siluros he that will reade the place and weigh it well, shall easily perceive he spake of fishes, and not of men. HEREFORD-SHIRE. T HE County which we call HEREFORD-SHIRE, and the Britans name Erei uc, lying in compasse round, as it were a Circle, is bounded on the East side with Worcester, and Gloce∣ster-shires, on the South with Monmouth-shire, on the West side with Radnor and Brecknor-shires, and on the North with Shrop∣shire ; This Country besides that it is right pleasant, is for yeelding of Corne, and feeding of Cattaile, in all places most fruitfull, and therewith passing well furnished with all things necessary for mans life: In so much, as it would scorne to come behinde any one Country throughout all England for fertility of Soile, and therefore say that for three W.W.W. wheat, wooll, and water it yeeldeth to no Shire of England. And verily, it hath also diverse notable rivers, namely Wye-Lug and Munow, which af∣ter they have watered the most flowring meddowes and fruitfull corne fields, at length meet together and in one chanell passe on to the Severn sea. Munow springing out of Hatterell hilles, The River Munow. which resembling a chaire doe rise aloft, and sense this shire on the South-West, as it descendeth downe, first strugleth to passe through by the foote of the said hilles to BLESTIUM, Blestium. a towne which Antonine the Emperour so placeth that for situation and distance it can bee no other than that, which standing by the side of this River is in British called Castle Hean, that is, The Old Castle, Old towne. and in English, The Old Towne: A poore small Village now, but this new name is a good proofe for the antiquity thereof: for, in both tongues it soundeth as much as an Old Castle or towne. Alterynnis. Next unto this Old Towne, Alterynnis lieth in manner of a River-Island, insulated within waters: the seat in old time of that ancient family of the Sitsilts or Cecils, knights, whence my right honourable Patron, The seat of the Cecils. accomplished with all the ornaments of vertue, wisdome, and Nobility, Sir William Cecil, Baron of Burghley, and Lord high Treasurer of England derived his descent. From hence, Munow turning Eastward, for a good space separateth this Country from Monmouth-shire and at Castle Map-harald, Harald Ewias. The Family of Ewias. Their coat of Armes. or Harold Ewias, is encreased with the River Dor. This Ewias Castle (that I may speake out of K. William the First his Booke) was repaired by Alured of Marleberg. Afterwards it pertained to one Harold a Gentle∣man, who in a Shield argent bare a Fesse Geules betweene three Estoiles Sable for his Armes: of whom it beganne to bee called Harold Ewias: but Sibyll his niece in the second degree and one of the heires, Tregoz and Grandison. Pag. 286. Snod hill. by her marriage transferred it to the Lords of Tregoz, frō whom it came at length to the Lords of Grandison descended out of Burgundie. But of them elsewhere. Now the said Dor, which running downe frō the North by Snod∣hill, a Castle, and the Barony sometime of Robert Chandos (where is a quary of excel∣lent marble) cutteth through the midst of the Vale, Marble. which of the River the Britans call Diffrin Dore: but the Englishmen that they might seeme to expresse the force of that word termed it the Gilden Vale, Gilden Vale. which name it may by good right and justly have, for the golden, wealthy and pleasant fertility thereof. For, the hils that compasse it in, on both sides are clad with woods; under the woods lie corne fields on either hand, and under those fields most gay and gallant medowes: then runneth in the midst between them a most cleere and crystall River, on which Robert Lord of Ewias placed a faire Monastery, wherein most of the Nobility and Gentry of these parts were interred. Part of this shire, which from this Vale declineth and bendeth Eastward, is now cal∣led Irchenfeld, Irchenfeld. in Domesday Booke Archenfeld, which, as our Historians write, was lay∣ed wast with fire and sword by the Danes in the yeere 715. at what time Camalac also a Britan Bishop was carried away prisoner. Kilpect. In this part stood Kilpeck a Castle of great name, and the seat it was of the noble Family of the Kilpecks, who were as some say the Champions to the Kings of England in the first age of the Normans: And I my selfe also will easily assent unto them. In the Raigne of Edward the First, there dwelt heere Sir Robert Wallerond, whose nephew Alane Plugenet lived in the honou∣rable state of a Baron. In this Archenfeld likewise, as wee reade in Domesday booke, certaine revenewes by an old custome were assigned to one or two Priests, on this condition that they should goe in Embassages for the Kings of England into Wales, and to use the words out of the same booke, The men of Archenfeld, whensoever the Army marcheth forward against the enemy by a custome make the Avantgard, and in the re∣turne homeward, the Rereward. The river Wy. Clifford Castle. As Munow runneth along the lower part of this shire, so Wy with a bending course cutteth over the middest; upon which River in the very West limit Clifford Castle standeth; which William Fitz Osborn Earle of Hereford built upon his owne West (as it is in King William the Conquerours booke) but Raulph de Todenay held it. Afterward it seemeth to have come unto Walter the sonne of Richard Fitz Punt a Norman; for he was sirnamed De Clifford, The Clifford Inquis. 26. E. 1. and from him the right honorable family of the Earles of Cumberland doe truly deduce their descent. But in the daies of King Edward the First, John Giffard who married the heire of Walter L. Clifford had it in his hands. Then Wy with a crooked and winding streame rolleth downe by Whitney, which hath given name to a worshipfull Family, and by Bradwardin Castle, which gave both originall and name to that famous Thomas Bradwardin Archbishop of Canterbury, who for his variety of knowledge, and profound learning, was in that age tearmed The Profound Doctour: The Profound Doctour. and so at length commeth to Hereford the head City of this Country. How farre that little Region Archenfeld reached I know not, but the affinity be∣tweene these names, Ereinuc, Archenfeld, the towne ARICONIUM, of which An∣tonine in the description of this Tract maketh mention, Hereford. and Hareford or Hereford, which now is the chiefe City of the Shire, have by little and little induced mee to this opinion, that I thinke every one of these was derived from ARICONIUM. Yet doe I not thinke that Ariconium and Hereford were both one and the same: but like as Basil in Germany chalenged unto it the name of Augusta Rauracorum, and Bal∣dach in Assyria the name of Babylon, or that as one had originall from the ruines of Babylon, so the other from the ruines of Augusta: even so this Hariford of ours, (for so the common people call it) derived both name and beginning, in mine opinion, from his neighbour old ARICONIUM, which hath at this day no shape or shew at all of a Towne: as having beene by report, shaken to peeces with earthquake. Onely it reteineth still a shadow of the name, Kenchester. being called Kenchester, and sheweth to the beholders some ruines of walles, which they tearme Kenchester walles ; about which are often digged up foure square paving stones of Checker worke, British-brickes, peeces of Romane money and other such like remaines of Antiquity. But Hereford, her daughter, which more expressly resembleth the name thereof, standeth Eastward scarce three Italian miles from it, seated among most pleasant medowes and as plentifull corne fields, compassed almost round about with Rivers, on the North side and on the West with one that hath no name, on the South side with Wy, thath hastneth hither out of Wales. It is thought to have shewed her head first what time as the Saxons Heptarchie was in the flower and prime, built as some write by King Edward the Elder: neither is there, as farre as I have read, any memory thereof more ancient. For, the Britans, before the name of Hereford was knowne, called the place Tresawith, of Beech trees: and Hereford of an Old way : and the Saxons them∣selves of ferns. 793. The greatest encrease, if I be not deceived, that it had, came by Religion and by the Martyrdome of Ethelbert King of the East England. S. Ethelbert Martyr. Who when he wooed himselfe the daughter of Offa K. of the Mercians, was villanously for∣laid and murdered by the procurement of Quendred, Offaes wife, respecting more the countries of the East England, than the honest and honorable match of her daugh∣ter: which Ethelbert being registred in the Catalogue of Martyrs, had a Church here built and dedicated unto him by Milfrid a pety K. of the country, wherein when a Bi∣shops See was established, it grew to great wealth, first, through the devout liberality of the Mercians, and then of the West Saxons kings: for they at length were possessed of this City, as may be gathered out of William of Malmesbury, where he writeth, That Athelistan the West Saxon brought the Lords of Wales in this City of so hard passe, that by way of Tribute they were to pay every yeere (besides Hounds and Haukes) twenty pounds of gold, and three hundred pound of silver by weight. This Citie as farre as I can reade, had never any misfortune, unlesse it were in the yeere of our Lord 1055. wherein Gruffith Prince of South Wales, and Algar an English man, rebelling a∣gainst King Edward the Confessour, after they had put to flight Earle Ralph, sacked the Citie, destroyed the Cathedrall Church, and led away captive Leofgar the Bi∣shop. But Harold straightwaies after that hee and daunted their audacious cou∣rage, fensed it, as Floriacensis saith, with a broade and high Rampier. Hence it is, that Malmesbury writeth thus in his treatise of Bishops, Hereford is no great Citie, and yet by the height of those steepe and upright bankes cast up, it sheweth that it hath beene some great thing: and, as wee reade in the Domesday booke of King William the Conquerour: there were in all but an hundered and three men within the Walles and without. The Normans afterwards neere the East end of the Church along the side of Wy, built a mighty great and strong Castle: the worke as some report, of Earle Miles, which now yeeldeth to Time, and runneth to ruine. After this, they walled the Citie about. Bishop Reinelm, in the reigne of Henry the First founded that beautifull Cathedrall Church, which now we see there, whose successours enlar∣ged it by adioyning thereto a proper Colledge for Priests, and faire houses for the Prebendaries. For, besides the Bishop who hath 302. Churches in his Dioecese, there are in this Church, a Deane, two Archdeacons, a Chaunter, a Chauncellour, 2 Treasurer and eight and twenty Prebendaries. In the Church, I saw in manner no Monuments, but the Bishops Tombes. And I have heard that Thomas Cantlow the Bishop, a man of Noble birth, had here a very stately and sumptuous Sepulcher, who for his holinesse being canonized a Saint, went within a little of surmounting that princely Martyr King Ethelbert, such was the opinion of singular pietie and de∣votion. Geographers measure the position or site of this Citie by the Longitude of twenty degrees and foure and twenty scruples: and by the Latitude of two and fifty degrees and sixe scruples. Wy is not gone full three miles from hence, but he intercepteth by the way the river Lug, who running downe a maine out of Radnor hils, with a still course passeth through the mids of this country, from the North-west of the South-east. At the first entrance, Brampton Brian. it seeth a farre off, Brampton Brian Castle, which, a famous family na∣med hereof de Brampton, wherein the forname was usually Brian, held by continuall succession unto the time of King Edward the First: but now, by the female heires it is come to R. Harleie: Wigmore. neere at hand it beholdeth Wigmore, in the English Saxons tongue , repaired in elder times by King Edward the elder, after∣ward, fortified by William Earle of Hereford with a Castle, in the wast of a ground (for so reade we in Domesday booke ) which was called Marestun, in the tenure of Radulph de Mortimer, Barons Mor∣timer. from whom those Mortimers that were afterwards Earles of March lineally descended, of whom, you may reade more in Radnor-shire. Three miles off, there is another neighbour Castle, Richards Castle. Lords of Ri∣chards Castle. called Richards Castle, the possession first of the Sayes, then of the Mortimers, and afterwards of the Talbots by hereditarie succession. At length by the heires of Sir Iohn Talbot, the inheritance was divided betweene Sir Guarin Archdeacon and Sir Matthew Gurnay. Beneath this Castle, Nature, who no where dis∣porteth her selfe more in shewing wonders, then in waters, hath brought forth a pretty well, which is alwaies full of little bones, or as some thinke, of small frog∣bones, although they be from time to time drawne quite out of it, whence it is com∣monly called Bone well. Bone well. And not farre off, is placed Croft Castle, the possession of that very ancient family of the Crofts Knights, who have there now a long time flouri∣shed in great and good esteeme. Thence passeth Wy to Lemster, Lemster. which also was called Leon Minister, and Lions Mona∣stery, of a Lyon that appeared to a religious man in a vision (as some have dreamed.) But whereas the Britans call it Lhan Lieni: which signifieth a Church of Nunnes, and that it is certainely knowne, that Merewalc a King of the Mercians, built here a Church for Nunnes (that afterwards became a Cell belonging to the Monastery of Reading ) to seeke any other originall of the name, than from those Nunnes: what were it else but to hunt after the windes? Yet there want not some, who derive it from Line, whereof the best kinde groweth here. The greatest name and same that it hath at this day is of the wooll in the territories round about, Lemster Ore the best wooll. Lemster bread and Webley Ale. ( Lemister Ore they call it) which setting aside that of Apulia and Tarentum all Europe counteth to be the very best. so renowned also it is for Wheat, and bread of the Finest floure, that Lemster bread and Weabley Ale (a towne belonging to the noble Familie D'Eu∣reux ) are growne unto a common proverbe. By reason of these commodities the mercates at Lemster were so frequented, that they of Hereford and Worcester com∣plaining that the confluence of people thither impaired their mercates, procured that by Royall authoritie the mercat day was changed. Now have I nothing more concerning Lemster, but that William Breosa Lord of Brecknock, when hee revolted from King John, Webley. did set it on fire and defaced it. As for that Webley aforesaid, it is situate more within the Country, Barons Ver∣dons. and was the Baronie of the Verdons: the first of which house named Bertram de Verdon came into England with the Normans; whose posteritie by marriage with an inheretrice of Laceies of Trim in Ireland, were for a good while hereditary Constables of Ireland: and at last the possessions were by the daughters devolved to the Furnivalls, Burghersh, Ferrars of Groby, Crop-hulls, and from the Crop-hulls by the Ferrars of Chartly, unto D'Eureux Earles of Essex. Neere neighbours unto Webley, more Westward are these places, Huntingdon Castle, the possession in times past of the Bohuns Earles of Hereford and of Essex: Kinnersley, belonging to the auncient Family De la-bere, and Erdsley: where the auncient Fami∣ly of the Baskervills, Basservile. See Gemition, lib. ult. have long inhabited, which bred in old time so many worthie Knights, who deduce their pedigree from a Neice of Dame Gunora that most fa∣mous Lady in Normandy, and long agoe flourished in this Country and Shrop-shire adjoyning, and held, (that I may note so much by the way) the Hamelet of Lanton in chiefe, Fin. Hilarii 20. Ed. 3. as of the Honour of Montgomery, by the service of giving to the King a barbd∣headed Arrow, whensoever he commeth into those parts to hunt in Cornedon Chace. Lugg hasteneth now to Wy, first by Hampton, where that worthy Knight Sir Rou∣land Lenthal, who (being Maister of the Wardrobe unto King Henry the Fourth, had married one of the heires of Thomas Earle of Arundell ) built a passing faire house, which the Coningsberes (men of good worship and great name in this tract) have now a good long time inhabited: Marden. Sutton. then, by Marden and Southton, or Sutton: of which twaine, Sutton sheweth some small remaines of King Offaes Palace, so infamous for the murdering of Ethelbert: and Marden is counted famous for the Tombe of the said Ethelbert, who had lien heere a long time without any glorious memoriall, be∣fore that he was translated to Hereford. Neere unto the place where Lugg and Wy meete together, Eastward, a hill which they call Marcley hill, Marcley hill. in the yeere of our redemption, 1571. (as though it had wa∣kened upon the suddaine out of a deepe sleepe) roused it selfe up, and for the space of three daies together mooving and shewing it selfe (as mighty and huge an heape as it was) with roring noise in a fearefull sort, and overturning all things that stood in the way, A Mountaine mooving. advanced it selfe forward to the wonderous astonishment of the behold∣ers: by that kinde of Earthquake which as I deeme, naturall Philosophers call Bras∣matias. And not farre from this hill, toward the East also, under Malvern hills (which in this place bound the East part of this shire) standeth Ledbury upon the River Led∣den, a Towne well knowne, which Edwin the Saxon, a man of great power, gave unto the Church of Hereford, being assuredly perswaded that by Saint Ethelberts in∣tercession he was delivered from the Palsey. Touching the Military fort on the next hill, I need not to speake, seeing that in this tract which was in the Marches, and the ordinary fighting ground plot, first betweene the Romanes and Britans, afterwards betweene the Britains and the English, such holds and entrenchments are to be seene in many places. But Wy now carrying a full streame, after it hath entertained Lugg runneth downe with more bendings and bowings, first by Holm Lacy, the feate of the ancient and noble Family of Scudamore unto which accrewed much more worship by marriage with an heire out of the race of Ewias in this shire, Scudamore or Escudamor. and Hunter∣combe, &c. else where. From hence passeth Wy downe betweene Rosse, made a free Burrough by King Henry the Third, now well knowne by reason of iron Smiths and Wilton over against it, Wilton. Barons Grey de Wilton. a most ancient Castle of the Greis, whence so many wor∣thy Barons of that name have drawne their originall. This was built as men say by Hugh de Long-champ, but upon publique and certaine credit of Records it appea∣reth, that King John gave Wilton with the Castle to H. de Longchamp ; and that by mar∣riage it fell to William Fitz-Hugh, and likewise not long after to Reinold Grey in the daies of King Edward the first. Goderich Castle. Now, when Wy hath a little beneath saluted Gode∣rick Castle, which King John gave unto William Earle Mareschall, and was after∣ward for a time the principall seate of the Talbots, hee speedeth himselfe to Mon∣mouth-shire, and bids Hereford-shire farewell. When the state of the English-Saxons was now more than declining to the downe-fall, * Ralph sonne to Walter Medantinus by Goda King Edward the Confes∣sours sister, Earles of Here∣ford. governed this Countie, as an Official Earle: but the infamous for base cowardise, was by William the Conquerour remooved, and William Fitz-Osbern of Crepon a martiall Norman who had subdued the Isle of Wight, and was neere al∣lied to the Dukes of Normandy, was substituted in his place: When he was slaine in assistance of the Earle of Flanders, his sonne Roger surnamed De Bretevill succee∣ded, and soone after for conspiracie against the Conquerour was condemned to per∣petuall prison, and therein died leaving no lawfull issue. Then King Stephen gran∣ted to Robert Le Bossu Earle of Leicester who had married Emme or Itta (as some call her) heire of Bretevill (to use the words of the Graunt) the Burrough of Hereford, with the Castle, Constables of England. and the whole County of Hereford, but all in vaine. For Maude the Em∣presse who contended with King Stephen for the Crowne, advanced Miles the sonne of Walter Constable of Glocester unto this Honour, and also graunted to him Constabulariam Curiae suae, i. The Constableship of her Court, whereupon his po∣steritie were Constables of England, as the Marshalship was graunted at the first, by the name of Magistratus Marescalsiae Curiaenostrae. Howbeit, Stephen afterwards stript him out of these Honours which he had received from her. This Miles had five sonnes; Roger, Walter, Henry, William, and Mahel, men of especiall note, who were cut off every one issuelesse by untimely death, after they had all but William, succeeded one another in their Fathers inheritance. Unto Ro∣ger King Henry the Second among other things gave, The Mote of Hereford with the whole Castle, and the third peny issuing out of the revenewes of Plees of the whole County of Hereford, whereof he made him Earle. But after Roger was deceased, the same King, if wee may beleeve Robert Abbot De Monte, kept the Earledome of Hereford to himselfe. The eldest sister of these named Margaret, 1156. was married to Humfrey Bohun the third of that name, and his heires were high Constables of England, namely, Hum∣frey Bohun the Fourth; 2. Par. Chart an. 1. Reg. Joan. Matth. Paris Joan. The booke of Walden. The booke of Lanthony M nastery. Henry his sonne, unto whom King Iohn graunted twenty pounds yeerely to be received out of the third penny of the County of Hereford, whereof he made him Earle. This Henry married the sister and heire of William Mandevill Earle of Essex, and died in the fourth yeere of Henry the Third his reigne: Humfrey the Fifth his sonne, who was also Earle of Essex: whose sonne Humfrey the Sixth of that fore∣name died before his Father, having first begotten Humfrey the Seventh by a daughter and one of the heires of William Breos Lord of Brecknock: His sonne Hum∣frey the Eighth was slaine at Burrowbrig, leaving by Elizabeth his wife, daughter un∣to King Edward the First and the Earle of Hollands widow, among other children, namely, Iohn Bohun, Humfrey the Ninth, both Earles of Hereford and Essex, and dy∣ing without issue: and William Earle of Northampton, unto whom Elizabeth a daughter and one of the heires of Giles Lord Badlesmer, bare Humfrey Bohun the Tenth and last of the Bohuns who was Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, Constable besides of England: who left two Daughters, Aeleonor the Wife of Tho∣mas of Woodstock Duke of Glocester, and Mary, wedded to Henry of Lancaster Earle of Darby, who was created Duke of Hereford, and afterwards Crowned King of England. Henry the Fourth King of England. But after this, Edward Stafford last Duke of Buckingham was stiled Earle of Hereford, for that hee descended from Thomas of Woodstock his Daugh∣ter, who was after remarried to Sir William Burchier called Earle of Ew. And in our memorie, King Edward the Sixth Honoured Walter D'Eureux, the Lord Ferrars of Chartley descended by the Bourgchiers from the Bohuns, with the title of Vicount Hereford, whose Grand-sonne Walter Vicount Hereford, Queene Elizabeth created afterwards Earle of Essex. There are contained in this County Parishes 176. RADNOR Comitatus quem SILVRES Osim Incosuerunt RADNOR-SHIRE. V Pon Hereford-shire, on the North-West, joyneth Radnor-shire, in the British tongue, Sire Maiseveth ; in forme three square, and the farther West it goeth, the narrower still it grow∣eth. On the South-side, the River Wy separateth it from Brecknock-shire, and on the North part, lieth Montgomery-shire. The East and South parts thereof bee more fruitfull than the rest, which lying uneven and rough with Moun∣taines, is hardly bettered by painfull Husbandry: yet it is stored well enough with Woods, watered with running Rivers, and in some pla∣ces with standing Meres. The East-side hath to beautifie it, besides other Castles of the Lords Marchers, now all buried well neere, in their owne ruines, Castle Paine ; built and so named of Paine a Norman, and Castle Colwen, which, if I be not decei∣ved, was sometime called the Castle of Maud in Colewent. Castle Colwe or Mauds Ca¦stle in Colwe For a very famous Castle that was, and Robert de Todeney a great Noble man, in the reigne of Edward the Second was Lord of it. It is verily thought, that it belonged aforetime to the Breo∣ses, Lords of Brechnoc, and to have taken the name from Maude of Saint Valeric, a very shrewd, stout, and malapert stomackfull woman, wife to William Breos, who discovered a rebellious minde against King John. Which Castle being cast downe by the Welsh, King Henry the Third, in the yeere 1231. reedified strongly with stone, Matth. Paris and called it in despight of Lhewellin Prince of Wales Maugre Lhewellin. But of especiall name is Radnor the principall Towne of the whole Shire, Radnor in British Mai∣seveth, faire built, as the maner of that Country is, with thatched houses. In times past it was firmely fensed with a Wall and Castle: Owen Glen∣dour. but after that Owen Glendower dwy that notable Rebell had burnt it, it began by little and little to decrease, and grow to decay, tasting of the same fortune that the mother thereof did before, I meane Old Radnor, called in British Maiseveth hean, and for the high situation Pencrag ; which in the reigne of King John, Rhese Ap Gruffin had set on fire. If I should say, that this Maiseveth or Radnor was that ancient Citie MAGI, which Antonine the Em∣perour seemeth to call MAGNOS, where, as we finde in the booke of Notices, the Commander of the Pacensian Regiment lay in garrison, under the Lieutenant, or Lord Generall of Britaine, in the reigne of Theodosius the younger ; in mine owne o∣pinion surely, and perhaps in other mens conceit also, I should not vary from the truth. For we reade in Writers of the middle age, Magesetae. of inhabitants of this coast called MA∣GESETAE; also of Earles Masegetenses and Magesetenses: and the distance, if it be counted both from Gobannium or Abergevenny, and also from Brangonium or Wor∣cester, differeth scarce an haire bredth from Antonines computation. Scarce three miles Eastward from hence, Prestaine. you see Prestaine, in British Lhan Andre, that is, Saint Andrews Church ; which of a very little village within the memorie of our Grand∣fathers, is by the meanes of Richard Martin Bishop of Saint Davids, growne now to be so great a mercate Towne and faire withall, that at this day it dammereth and dimmeth the light in some sort of Radnor. From whence also scarce foure miles off, stands Knighton, Knighton. a Towne able to match with Prestaine, called in British, as I have heard say Trebuclo, in steed of Trefyclaudh, of a famous ditch lying under it, which Offa King of the Mercians with admirable worke and labour, caused to be cast from Dee-Mouth unto Wy-Mouth, by this Towne, for the space of foureskore and ten miles, to separate the Britans from his Englishmen: whereupon, in British it is cal∣led Claudh Offa, that is, Offaes ditch. Concerning which, John of Salisbury in his Po∣licraticon writeth thus. Harald ordained a law, that what Welshmen soever should be found with a weapon, Offa dike. on this side the limit which he had set them, that is to say, Offaes Dike, he should have his right hand cut off by the Kings Officers. When yee are past this place, all the ground that lieth toward the West and South limits, being for the most part barren, leane, and hungry, is of the inhabitants called Melienith, for that the Mountaines be of a yellowish colour. Yet remaine there many footings as it were of Castles to be seene heere and there, but especially Ke∣venles and Timbod which standing upon a sharpe poynted hill, Lhewellin Prince of Wales overthrew in the yeere 1260. This Melienith reacheth as farre as to the River Wy, which cutteth overthwart the West corner of this shire, and being hindered in his streame with stones lying in his way, upon a suddaine for want of ground to glide on, hath a mighty and violent downefall: whereupon the place is tearmed, Raihader Gowy, that is, The fall or Flud∣gates of Wy: And I cannot tell, whether thereupon that British word Raihader, the English men forged this name first for the whole shire, and afterwards for the chiefe Towne. By this Floudgate or fall of the water there was a Castle which Rhese Prince of Southwales (as we reade) repaired under King Richard the First. Hard by, there is in some sort a vast and wide wildernesse, hideous after a sort to behold, by reason of the turning and crooked by-waies and craggie Mountaines, into which as the safest place of refuge, Vortigern. Vortigern that pestilent wretch and bane of his native Country, odious both to God and man, and (whose memory the Britains may wish damned) withdrew himselfe, when after he had called the Saxons into this Iland, and in horrible incest married his owne daughter. And heere he fell at length too too late into serious con∣sideration of the greatnesse of his vile and wicked acts. But by revenging fire from Heaven, the flying dart of God above, he was burnt with his Citie Caer Guortigern, which he had heere built for his refuge. And not farre from hence, as if the place had been fatall, not onely this Vortigern the last Monarch of British bloud, but also Lhew∣ellin the last Prince of Wales of the British race being forelaid, Lewellin. was slaine by Adam Francton in the yeere of our Redemption 1282. Of the said Vortigern, Ninnius nameth a little Country heere Guortiger-maur ; neither is that name as yet altogether lost: but of the Ci ie, there remaineth no memory at all, but our of writers. Some are of opinion, that Guthremion Castle arose out of the ruins and rubbish thereof, which in the yeere 1201. the Welsh for malice they bare to Roger Lord Mortimer and in spight of him laid even with the ground. Moreover, this part of the Country was in old time called Guarthenion, Guarthenion. as Ninnius restifieth, who wrote, that the said wicked Vorti∣gern, when he was plainely and sharply reprooved by that godly Saint German, did not onely not turne from his lewd and licentious life to the worship and service of God, but also let flie slanderous speeches against that most holy man: Wherefore, Vortimer the sonne of Vortigern, Guarish in Bri∣tish, slander, and Eniawn, just. as Ninnius saith, for the slander which his Father had raised of Saint German, decreed, that he should have the land as his owne for ever, wherein he had suffered so reprochfull an abuse: whereupon, and to the ened that Saint German might be had in memory, it was called Guarthenion, which signifieth in English, A slander justly retorted. Earles of March. The Mortimers, descended from the Niece of Gonora Wife of Richard the First, Duke of Normandie, were the first Normans that having discomfited the English Saxon Edricke Sylvaticus, that is, The wild, wonne a great part of this little Country to themselves: And after they had a long time been eminent above all others in these parts, at length King Edward the Third, about the yeere of Salvation 1328. Created Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, Earle of this Welsh limit, or, according to the com∣mon speech, Earle of March, who soone after was sentenced to death, because he had insulted upon the Common-wealth, favoured the Scots to the prejudice of England, conversed over familiarly with the ings mother, and contrived the destruction and death of King Edward the Second, The booke of Lanthony Ab∣bay. the Kings Father. He by his Wife Joan Jenevell, (who brought him rich revenewes, as well in Ireland as in England) had Edmund his Sonne, who felt the smart of his Fathers wickednesse, and lost both patrimonie and title of Earle. Howbeit, his Sonne Roger was fully restored, recovered the title of Earle of March and was chosen a fellow of the order of the Garter, See Earles of Ulster. at the first institu∣tion thereof. This Roger begat of Philip Montacute, Edmund Earle of March: and he tooke to Wife Philip the only daughter of Leonell Duke of Clarence the third sonne of King Edward the Third, whereby came unto him the Earldome of Vlster in Ireland and the Lordship of Clare. After he had ended his life in Ireland where he governed with great commendation; his sonne Roger succeeded, being both Earle of March and Vlster, whom King Richard the Second declared heire apparent, and his succes∣sour to the Crowne, as being in right of his Mother the next and undoubted heire. But he dying before king Richard, left issue, Edmund and Anne. Edmund, in regard of his Royall bloud and right to the Crowne stood greatly suspected to Henrie the Fourth, who had usurped the kingdome; and by him was first exposed unto dan∣gers, in so much as he was taken by Owen Glendour a Rebell, and afterward whereas the Percies purposed to advance his right, he was conveyed into Ireland, kept almost twenty yeeres prisoner in the Castle of Trim suffering all miseries incident to Prin∣ces of the bloud while they lie open to every suspition; and there through extreame griefe ended his daies; leaving his sister Anne his heire. She was married to Richard Earle of Cambridge, in whose right, his heires and posterity were Earles of March, and made claime to the kingdome, which in the end also they obtained, as wee will shew in another place. In which respect King Edward the Fourth created his eldest Sonne being Prince of Wales, See in Yorke-shire, toward the end. Duke of Cornwall, &c. Earle of March also, for a further augmentation of his Honour. As for the title of Rad-nor, no man ever bare it to my knowledge. In this are Parishes 52. BRECKNOC Comitaus pars Osim SILVRVM BRECHNOCK-SHIRE. B Eneath Radnor-shire Southward lyeth BRECHNOCK-SHIRE, in the British Brechineau so named, as the Welsh∣men relate, of a Prince named Brechanius, whom they report to have had a great, and an holy Offspring, to wit, twenty foure Daughters all Saints. Farre greater this is than Rad∣nor-shire, but thicker set with high Hilles; yet are the val∣leies fruitfull every where. On the East side it is bounded with Hereford-shire. On the South with Monmo th, and Glamorgan-shires: ond on the West with Caermarden-shire. But seeing there is no∣thing memorable or materiall to the description of this small Province, which is not set downe by the curious diligence of Giraldus Cambrensis who was an Arch∣deacon heereof above foure hundred yeeres since. I thinke I may doe well for my selfe to hold my peace a while, and to admit him with his stile into the fellowship of this labour. Brecknocke, saith hee, in his Booke called Itinerarium Cambriae, is a Country having sufficient store of Corne; and if there bee any defect thereof, it is plentifully supplied out of the fruitefulnesse of England bordering so neere upon it; a Country likewise well stored with pastures and Woods, with wilde Déere and heards of Cattaile, having abundance beside of fresh water fish, wherewith Vske on the one side and Wy on the other serveth it: For, both these Rivers are full of Salmons and Trouts, but Wy of the twaine is the better, affording the best kinde of them which they call Vmbras. Enclosed it is on every side with high hilles, unlesse it be on the North part. In the West it hath the mountaines of Canterbochan: On the South∣side likewise the Southern mountaines, the chiefe whereof is called Cadier Arthur, that is, Arthurs chaire, of the two toppes of the same (for it is , that is, shaped with two capes) resembling the forme of a Chaire. And for that the Chaire standeth very high and upon a steepe downefall, by a common tearme it was assigned to Arthur the greatest and mightiest King of the Britans. In the very pitch and top of this hill, there walmeth forth a spring of water: And this fountaine in manner of a Well is deepe, but foure square, having no brooke or Riveret issuing from it, yet are there Trouts found therein. And therefore ha∣ving these barres on the South side, the aire is the colder, defendeth the Country from the ex∣cessive heat of the Sunne, and by a certaine naturall wholsomnesse of the aire, maketh it most temperate. But on the East side the mountaines of Talgar and Ewias doe as it were fore∣sense it. On the North side, as he said, it is more open and plaine, namely where the River Wy severeth it from Radnor-shire, by which stand two Townes well knowne for their antiquity, Buelth and Hay. Buelth is pleasantly situate with Woods about it, fortified also with a Castle, but of a later building, by the Breoses and Mortimers, when as Rhese ap Gruffin had rased the ancient Castle. Now, the Mercate much resorted unto maketh it more famous thereabout, but in times past it seemeth to have beene for the owne worth of great name, because Ptolomee observed the position therof ac∣cording to the Longitude and Latitude: Bulleum. who called it BULLEUM Silurum. Of this towne the country lying round about it, being rough and full of hils; is named Buelth: wherein, when as the Saxons were now spoiling and harrying the whole Island, and Vortigern had withdrawne himselfe into these parts, Pascentius his sonne ruled all as Lord, by the permission of Aurelius Ambrose, as Ninnius writeth, who in his Chap∣ter of Mervails, reporteth I wot not what wondrous thing heere, of a heape of stones, wherein, forsooth, was plainly to be seene the footing of King Arthurs hound. And as for Hay, Hay. which in British is called Trekethle, that is, The Towne in a grove of Hasell trees, in the very utmost skirt of this Shire next unto Hereford-shire, it standeth hard by the river Wye: well knowne, as it seemeth to the Romans, whose coines is often digged up there, and it sheweth also by the ruines, that in old time it was walled. But being now as it were decaied it complaineth of that most lewde Rebell Owen Glendo∣werdwy for his furious outrages, who in wasting and spoiling all those Countries, most villanously did depopulate it and set it on fire. As this River Wy washeth the North side of this Shire, so doth Vske a notable Ri∣ver likewise runne through the middest thereof, which Vske springing out of the Blacke-Mountaine, Brecknock. passeth along with a shallow streame, beside Brechnock the Shire Towne, standing in the very heart in manner of the Country, which the Britans call Aber-Hodney, because the two Rivers Hodney and Uske doe meet in that place. That this Towne was inhabited in the Romans time, appeareth by the Coines of Roman Emperours now and then digged up heere. Bernard Newmarch, who conquered this little Shire, built heere a goodly great Castle, which the Breoses and Bohuns repai∣red: and in our fathers remembrance King Henry the Eighth in the Friery of the Dominicans appointed a Collegiat Church of foureteene Prebendaries, which hee translated hither from Aberguilly in Caer-Marden-shire. Two miles hence Eastward, there spreads it selfe abroad a large Poole, which the Britans call Linsavethan and Linsavathen, Linsavethen Mere. that is, A Lake of standing water, Giraldus tearmeth it Clamosum, that is, Clamorous, or Crying loud, because it maketh a strange noise like thunder, as often as the Yce thereon doth thaw. In English we name it Brecknock-Meere. Brecknock Mere. Two miles it is in length and as much in bredth: breeding in times past many Otters, now full of Pearches, Tenches, and Eeles, which the Fishers row∣ing in small pliant botes doe take. Leveney a little River, after it is runne into this Poole keepeth his owne hew and color still by himselfe; as disdaining to be mingled therewith, (which the very color sheweth) is thought to carry out his owne water entertained a while there by the way, and no more than hee brought in with him. It hath beene a currant speech of long continuance among the neighbours thereabout, that where now the Meere is, there was in times past a City, which being swallowed up in an earthquake, resigned up the place unto the waters. And beside other reasons, they alleage this for one, that all the high waies of this shire come directly hither on every side. Which if it be true, what other City should a man thinke stood by the River Leveney, than LOVEN∣TIUM, which Ptolomee placeth in this tract: Loventium. and in no place hitherto could I finde it (albeit I searched diligently for it) either by the name, or situation, or ruines re∣maining. Marianus Scotus (which I had almost forgotten) seemeth to call this Lake Bricena Meere, Bricenaw Mere. who recordeth that Edelfled the Mercian Lady, in the yeere 913. entred into the land of the Britans to win by assault a Castle at Bricenau Meere ; and that she tooke there the King of the Britans wife prisoner. Whether this Castle were Brechnock it selfe or Castle Dinas, Brecknock. which standeth over it upon a rockey hill, and which the higher it riseth the slenderer and smaller it becommeth, it is not certainely knowne. Blean Leveney. But that Blean Laveney Castle hard by, was the chiefe place of the Barony, that Petre Fitz Herbert the sonne of Herbert Lord of Dean-forest by Lucy the daugh∣ter of Miles Earle of Hereford held, appeareth evidently upon Record. Lords of Brechnock. In the Raigne of King William Rufus, Bernard Newmarch the Norman, a man both hardy and politique withall, having levied a great Army of Englishmen and Nor∣mans together, was the first that entred into this territory by force and armes, won it and wrested it out of the Welshmens hands by bloudy encounters, raised fortresses heere for his fellow souldiers (among which the chiefe were the Aubreeis, Gunters, Haverds, Waldbeofes and Prichards ) allotted lands and lordships, and that hee might set sure footing, and establish his seat among the Welsh, who repined maliciously at him, he tooke to wife Nesta the daughter of Gruffin: who being a woman of a shame∣lesse and revengefull spirit, both bereft her selfe of her owne good name, and also de∣feated her sonne of his inheritance. For, when Mahel the said Bernards onely sonne, did shake up in som hard and sharpe termes a young Gentleman, with whom she u∣sed more familiarly than was beseeming: shee, as the Poet saith, iram atque animos à crimine s mens, growing angry and stomackfull upon this imputation, tooke her cor∣porall oath before King Henry the Second, and protested that her sonne Mahel was begotten in adultery, and not by Bernard her Husband: whereupon Mahel being disinherited, Sibyl his sister entred upon that faire Inheritance, and with the same enriched her Husband Miles, Earle of Hereford. But after that five sonnes of Miles died without issue, Called also Braus and Breus. this Brechnock-shire in the partition of the inheritance fell to Ber∣tha his daughter: who by Philip de Breos had a sonne William de Breos Lord of Brech∣nock, upon whom the seditious spirit and shrewd tongue of his wife drew a world of calamities. For when shee had with her intemperate and unbridled language contu∣meliously abused King John, Red Booke in the Exchequer. the King thereupon (because her Husband William was very deepely indebted unto him) fell to bee quicke and rigorous in demanding the debt: But he, not able to make payment, after he had shifted it off many times, and by breaking day, still made default, in the end mortgaged unto the King three of his Castles; namely Hay, Brecknock and Radnor, and put them into his hands. But soone after, levying certaine forces, such as he could muster up in haste, upon a sud∣daine, surprised them, slew the Garison Souldiers and wrested the said peeces per∣force from them, burnt the Towne of Lemster, and thus killing, slaying and driving away booties, he made foule worke and havocke every way, with all such outrages as Rebels doe commonly commit. But when the King pursued him, hee conveyed himselfe and all that he had into Ireland, complotted and combined with the Kings enemies there: yet under a colour, as if hee would make submission, hee came unto the King upon protection and assurance given of safety when he was upon his returne into Ireland. And notwithstanding many goodly promises of the contrary, he rai∣sed new stirres and troubles eftsoones in Wales: But forced in the end to leave his native Country, he died a banished man in France. As for his wife being taken priso∣ner, and famished in prison (the extremest misery that can befall unto man or woman) she paied most deerely for her wicked and malapert tongue. His sonne Giles, Bishop of Hereford, by the favour and consent of King John, having recovered his fathers inheritance neglecting his nephew the right heire, left it unto his brother Reginald, whose sonne William, Lhelin Prince of Wales having taken him in bed with his wife, hanged. But by the daughters of that William, the Mortimers, Cantelows, and Bo∣huns Earles of Hereford entred upon a great and goodly inheritance. And this Brech∣nock fell in partition unto the Bohuns, and in the end by them unto the Staffords: and when Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham was attainted, many very goodly reve∣newes fell unto the King in this Shire, and elsewhere. It reckoneth Parishes 61. MONMOUTH-SHIRE. B Eneath Brechnock and Hereford-shire Southward, lyeth the County of Monmouth, commonly called in English MON∣MOUTH-SHIRE, in times past Went-set and Wents-land, in British Guent, of an ancient City so called. It is inclosed on the North side with the River Munow that separateth it from Hereford-shire: on the East side with Wye running betweene it and Glocester-shire: on the West with the River Remney, which severeth it from Glamorgan-shire, and on the South with the Severn sea, whereinto the said Rivers together with Vske, that cutteth through the middest of the Country, are discharged. As for commodities necessary to mans life, it hath not onely sufficient for it selfe, but also affoordeth them in plenti∣full manner to the neighbours adjoyning. The East part is full of grasse and woods: the West is somewhat hilly and stony, yet not unthankefull to the Husbandman. The people, as saith Giraldus writing of his owne age, most inured to martiall conflicts, is in feates of strength and valour right commendable, and for skill of archery and shooting farre surpassing any Country in Wales. In the utmost angle called Ewias toward the North-West, Ewias Lacy. not farre from the Ri∣ver Munow, among Hatterell hills which because they rise up in heigth like a chaire, they call Munith Cader, Lanthony. Barons Lacy. there stood Lanthony a little ancient Abbay, which Walter Lacy founded; unto whom William Earle of Hereford gave faire lands heere, and from whom are descended those renowned Lacies, worthily reputed among the most noble Conquerours of Ireland. The situation of which Abbay Giraldus Cam∣brensis, who knew it better than I, shall pensile it out unto you for mee. In the most deepe Valley of Ewias, saith hee, which is about an arrow-shoote over, standeth a Church of Saint Iohn Baptist, Saint John Baptist. enclosed on every side in a round compasse, with hilles mounting up into the aire, covered with lead, and built sightly, as the nature of the place would permit, with an arched roofe of stone, in a place where had stood aforetime a poore Chappell of Saint David the Archbishop, adorned onely with wilde mosse, and wreathes of clasping ivie. A fit place for true Religion, and of all the Monasteries in the Island of Britaine most convenient for Canonicall Discipline, being founded first by two Eremits in the honour of an Eremite, farre remooved from all stirres and noise of people, in a certaine desert and solitary nouke, seated upon the River Hodney running along the botome of the Vale, whereof and of Hodney to∣gether, it is called Lanhodeny: For, Lhan signifieth, a Church or Ecclesiasticall place. But if we will speake more exquisitely, it may be said, that the proper name of that place is in Welsh Nanthodeny: For even to this day, they that dwell thereabout call it Lhan Devi Nanthodeny. Hodney. That is, Davids Church upon the River Hodeney. Now, the raine, which mountaines breed, falleth heere very often, the windes blow strong, and all Winter time almost it is continually cloudy and misty weather. And yet notwithstanding (such is the healthfull temperature of the aire, which the grosser it is, the gentler and milder it is) very seldome there are any diseases heere. The Cloisterers sitting heere in their Cloistures, when to refresh and breathe themselves they chance to looke up, they see on every side of them, over the high roofes and ridges of their houses, the tops of the hils touching as it were the skie, and the very wilde Deere for the most part, whereof there is heere great store, feeding aloft (as one would say) in the farthest Horizon or kenning of their sight. And it is betweene one and three of the clocke, or thereabout in a faire cleere day, ere they can see heere the body of the Sunne, so much adoe he hath to get above the hill tops by that time. And a little after. The fame that went of this place drew Roger Bishop of Salisbury hither, being then the chiefe Go∣vernour of the Realme under the King, who when hee had a good while considered with admi∣ration, the nature of the place, the desert solitarinesse, the Eremeticall state and condition of the religious men there serving God without complaining, together with their conversation in every respect without murmuring and grudging, returned home to the King, and making re∣port unto him of such things there as were worth relation, when he had spent the most part of the day in commendation of the foresaid place; at length knit up all the praises thereof in this one word: What should I say more, quoth hee, All the treasure both of King and Kingdome, will not suffice to build this Cloisture: when as therefore he had held a good while as well the King as the whole Court in suspense, wondering as they did at this speech, at length he expoun∣ded the darke riddle of his words, by meaning the Cloistures of those hilles, wherewith it is en∣closed on every side. But heereof enough, if not too much. Grossemont. Skinffrith. By the River Munow are to bee seene Grossemont and Skinffrith Castles belonging in times past by the grant of King John to the Breoses, afterwards to Hubert de Burgh, Earle of Kent, who, that he might calme the Court-tempests of displeasure and for the renewing of peace and recovering former favour, Historia Minor Matth. Paris. resigned both these and with∣all Blanc-castle and Hanfield into the hands of King Henry the Third. In the other corner North-Eastward, Munow and Wye at their confluence doe compasse almost round about the chiefe Towne of the Shire, and give it the name. For in the British tongue it is called Mongwy, Monmouth. and in ours Monmouth. On the North∣side, where it is not defended with the Rivers, it was fortified with a wall and ditch. In the middest of the Towne hard by the Mercate place standeth a Castle, which, as it is thought, John Baron of Monmouth built, from whom it came to the house of Lancaster, after that King Henry the Third had taken from him all his inheritance; for that he had sided with the Barons and stood rebelliously against him, or rather, as wee reade in the Kings Prerogative, because his heires had given their faith and allegeance to the Earle of Britaine in France. And ever since that time, the Towne hath flourished and beene of name in regard of their priviledges and immunities granted unto them by the Family of Lancaster. But for no one thing it is so much renowned, as for this, that it was the birth place of King Henry the Fifth that Tri∣umpher over France, and the second ornament of English Nation. That Henry I say, who by force of armes and military prowesse maugre the French, conquered France and brought Charles the Sixth King of France to that extremity, that after a sort he surrendred up his Crowne unto him. In regard of whose successe and fortu∣nate exploits in Warre, John Seward a Poet in those dayes not of the lowest ranke, in a joily lofty verse thus speaketh to the English: Ite per extremum Tanain, pigrósque Triones, Ite per arentem Lybiam, superate calores Solis, & arcanos Nili deprendite fontes, Herc leum finem, Bacchi transcurrite metas; Angli juris erit quicquid complectitur orbis. Anglis rubra dabunt pretiosas aequora conchas, Indus ebur, ramos Panchaia, vellera Seres: Dum viget Henricus, dum noster vivit Achilles, Est etenim laudes longè transgressus avitas. Passe on to Tanais farre remote, to frozen Northren Coast: Through Libye dry, beyond the line where Sunnes heat parcheth most. On forth and finde where all the springs of Nilus hidden lie, Those pillers fixt by Hercules, and bounds that mount on hie Surpasse; the Limit-markes also which father Bacchus pight; For why? what all the earth containes is under Englands right. To English shall the Red Sea yeeld the pretious pearely wilke, Indy yvory, sweet-frank-incense Panchaea, Seres silke, Whiles Henry lives, that Champion Achilles-like of ours, For he the praises farre surmounts of his Progenitours. Geffrey Ap-Arthur, or of Monmouth. Monmouth glorieth also that Geffrey Ap Arthur or Arthurius Bishop of Asaph the com∣piler of the British History was borne and bred there: a man to say truth well skilled in antiquities, but, as it seemeth, not of antique credite, so many toies and tales hee every where enterlaceth out of his owne braine as he was charged while hee lived, in so much as now hee is ranged among those Writers, whom the Roman Church hath censured to be forbidden. From hence Wy with many windings and turnings runneth downe Southward, yeelding very great plenty of delicate Salmons from September to April. And is at this day the bound betweene Glocester-shire and Monmouth-shire, in times past betweene the Welsh and Englishmen, according to this Verse of Nechams making. Inde vagos vaga Cambrenses, hinc respicit Anglos. By Wales on this side runneth Wy, And of the other England he doth eye. Who when he is come almost unto his mouth, Chepstow. runneth by Chepstow, that is, if one interprete it after the Saxons tongue, a Mercat: The Britans call it Castle-went. A famous Towne this is and of good resort, situate upon the side of an Hill, rising from the very River, fortified round about with a Wall of a large circuite, which includes within it both fields and orchyards. It hath a very spacious Castle situate over the River: and just against it stood a Priory: the better part whereof being pulled downe, the rest is conuerted into a Parish Church. As for the Bridge that standeth over Wy, it is of timber and very high built, because the River at every tide riseth to a great heigth. The Lords hereof were the Earles of Pembroch out of the Family of Clare, Earles of Strigh ll or Pembrock. who of Strighull Castle their seat a little way off, were commonly called Earles of Strig∣hull and of Pembrock. The last of whom named Richard, a man of an invincible courage, and having wonderfull strong armes and long withall, sirnamed Strong∣bow, because hee shot in a bow of exceeding great bent, and did nothing but with strong arme, was the first that by his valour made way for the English into Ireland. By a daughter of his it came to the Bigots, &c. but now it belongeth to the Earles of Worcester. This Towne is not very ancient to speake of. For, many there bee that constantly affirme, and not without good reason, that not many ages agoe it had his beginning from VENTA a very ancient City, that in the daies of Antonine the Em∣peror flourished about foure miles hence Westward and was named VENTA SI∣LURUM, Venta. (as one would say) the principall City of the Silures: Which name nei∣ther hostile fury nor length of time hath as yet discontinued: for it is called even at this day Caer went, Caer-went. that is, The City Went. But, as for the City it selfe, either time or hostility hath so carryed it away, that now were it not onely for the ruinate walles, the checker worke, pavements and peeces of Roman money, it would not appeare there was such a City. It tooke up in compasse above a mile: on the South side a great part of the Wall standeth, and there remaine little better than the rubbish of three Bulwarks. And yet of how great account it was in ancient times, wee may ga∣ther, if it were but by this, that before the name of Monmouth once heard of, all this whole Country was of it, called Guent, Went-set and Wents-land. Moreover, as wee reade in the life of Tathaius a British Saint ; The Booke of Landaffe Church. it was an Academy, that is to say, a place dedicated to the study of good letters, which the said Tathaie whom King Caradock the sonne of Inirius procured to come thither out of the desert wildernesse, go∣verned with great commendation, and there founded a Church. Five miles from hence Westward, Strighull Castle. is seated Strighull Castle, at the foote of the mountaines, we call it at this day Strugle, the Normans named it Estrighill: which as wee reade in King William the First his Domesday booke, William Fitz Osborn Earle of Hereford built: and afterwards it became the seat of the Earles of Pembrock out of the house of Clare. Whereupon they were usually called Earles of Strighull, as I e∣ven now intimated. Beneath these places upon the Severn sea, Portskeweth. nere unto Wy-mouth, standeth Portskeweth, which Marianus nameth Potescith: who hath recorded, that Harald in the yeere 1065. erected a Fort there against the Welshmen, * which they streightwaies under the con∣duct of Caradock, Sudbroke. overthrew. And adjoyning to it is Sudbrok, the Church wherof called Trinity Chappell standeth so neere the sea, that the vicinity of so tyrannous a neigh∣bour, hath spoiled it of halfe the Church-yarde, as it hath done also of an old For∣tification, lying thereby, which was compassed with a triple Ditch and three Ram∣piers as high as an ordinary house, cast in forme of a bowe, the string whereof is the sea-cliffe. That this was a Romane worke the Britaine brickes, and Romane coines there found are most certaine arguments, among which, the Reverend Father in God Francis Bishop of Landaffe (by whose information I write this) imparted unto me of his kindnesse one of the greatest peeces that ever I saw coined of Corinthian copper by the City of Elaia in the lesser Asia to the honour of the Emperour Seve∣rus with this Greeke Inscription, Coine of Severus. that is, THE EM∣PEROUR CAESAR. LUCIUS SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS PERTINAX. And in the Reverse, an Horseman with a Trophaee erected before him, but the letters not legible, save under him , that is, Of the Elaians, which kinde of great peeces the Italians call Medaglionj, Medailes. and were extraordinary coines, not for common use, but coined by the Emperours either to bee distributed by the way of Largesse in tri∣umphes, or to bee sent for tokens to men well deserving, or else by free Cities to the glory and memory of good Princes. What name this place anciently had, is hard to be found, but it seemeth to have beene the Port and landing place for Venta Silurum, when as it is but two miles from it. Then Throgoy, a little River neere unto Caldecot entereth into the Severn Sea, where we saw the wall of a Castle that belonged to the High Constables of England: Inq. 3. E. I. and was holden by the service of Constableship of England. Hard by, are seene Won∣dy and Penbow, Woundy. the seates in times past of the noble Family of Saint Maur, now cor∣ruptly named Seimor. For, G. Mareshall Earle of Pembrock about the yeere of our Lord 1240. was bound for the winning of Wondy out of the Welsh mens hands, to aide William Seimor. From him descended Roger de Saint Maur Knight, who married one of the heires of I. Beauchamp of Hach, a very noble Baron, who de∣rived his Pedegree from Sibyl Heire unto William Mareshall, that most puissant Earle of Pembrock, from William Ferrars Earle of Darby, from Hugh de Vivon, and William Mallet, men in times past most highly renowned. The Nobility of all these and of others besides, as may be evidently shewed, hath met together in that right honourable personage Edward Saint Maur or Seimor, The Family of Saint Maur or Seimor. now Earle of Hartford, a singular favourer of vertue and good learning, worthy in that behalfe to be honoured and commended to posterity. The Moore. Beneath this, lyeth spred for many miles together a Mersh, they call it the Moore, which, when I lately revised this worke, suffered a lamentable losse: For when the Severn Sea at a spring Tide in the change of the Moone what being driven backe for three dayes together with a South-West Winde, An Inundation in January. 1607. and what with a very strong pirry from the sea troubling it, swelled and raged so high, that with surging bil∣lowes it came rolling and in-rushing amaine upon this Tract lying so low, as also upon the like flats in Somerset-shire over against it, that it overflowed all, subverted houses and drowned a number of beasts, and some people withall. Where this Mersh Coast bearing out by little and little runneth forth into the sea, in the very point thereof standeth Goldclyffe aloft, Gold-cliffe. that is, as Giralaus saith, A Golden Cliffe, so called, because the stones there, of a golden colour, by reverberation of the Sunne shining full upon them, glitter with a wonderfull brightnesse: neither can I bee easily perswa∣ded (saith hee) that Nature hath given this brightnesse in vaine unto the stones, and that there should bee a flower heere without fruite, were there any man that would search into the Veines there, and using the direction of Art enter in the inmost and secretest bowels of the Earth. Neere to this place there remaine the Reliques of a Priory, that acknowledge those of Chandos for their founders and Patron. Passing thence by the Merish Coun∣try, we came to the mouth of the River Isca, River Uske. which the Britans name Usk and Wijsk, and some Writers terme it Osca. This River as it runneth through the middest, as I said before, of this County, floweth hard by three Townes of especiall antiquity. The first, in the limite of the Shire North-West, Antonine the Emperour calleth GOBANIUM, at the very meeting of Uske and Geveny, whereof it had the name: and even at this day, keeping the ancient name, as it were, safe and sound is tearmed Aber-Gevenny, Abergevenny. and short Aber-genny, which signifieth the confluents of Gevenny or Gobanny. Fortified it is with Wals and a Castle, which as saith Giraldus of all the Castles in Wales hath beene most defamed and stained with the foule note of trea∣son. First, by William, Earle Miles his sonne, afterwards by William Breos: for both of them after they had trained thither, under a pretense of friendship, certain of the No∣bles and chiefe Gentlemen of Wales, with promise of safe conduct, villanously slew them. But they escaped not the just judgement and vengeance of God. For, Willi∣am Breos, after he had beene stripped of all his goods, and lost his wife and some of his children, who were famished to death, died in banishment: the other William, be∣ing brained with a stone, whiles Breulais Castle was on fire, suffered in the end due punishment for his wicked deserts. The first Lord to my knowledge of Aber Gevenny was one Sir Hameline Balun who made Brien of Wallingford or Brient de L'isle called also the Fitz-Count his heire. He having built heere a Lazarhouse for his two sonnes that were Lepres, ordained Walter the sonne of Miles Earle of Hereford, heire of the greatest part of his inheritance. After him succeeded his brother Henry, slaine by the Welshmen, who seized upon his lands, which the Kings Lieutenants and Cap∣taines could not defend without great perill and danger. By a sister of this Henry it descended to the Breoses, and from them in right of marriage, by the Cantelowes to the Hastings, Lords of Aber∣gevenny. which Hastings being Earles of Pembrock enjoyed it for divers descents, and John Hastings having then no childe borne devised both it, and the Earledome of Pembrock as much as in him lay to his cosin Sir William Beauchamp, conditionally that he should beare his Armes. And when the last Hastings ended his life issuelesse, Regi∣nald Lord Grey of Ruthin being found his Heire, passed over the Barony of Aber-ge∣venny to the said William Beauchamp who was summoned afterward to Parliament by the name of W. Beauchamp de Abergevenny. Clausae 49. Edw. 3. Hee entailed the said Barony, reserving an estate to himselfe and his wife, and to the lawfull issue male of their bodies; and for default of such issue, to his brother Thomas Beauchamp Earle of Warwick and his heires males. This William Beauchamp Lord of Abergevenny, had a sonne named Richard, * who for his martiall valour was created Earle of Worcester, and slaine in the French warres, leaving one onely daughter, whom Sir Edward Nevill, tooke to wife▪ Since which time the Nevils have enjoyed the honorable title of the Barons of A∣bergevenny (howbeit the Castle was by vertue of the entaile aforesaid detained from them a long time.) The fourth Baron of this house dying in our remembrance, left one onely daughter Mary, married to Sir Thomas Fane Knight, betwixt whom being the heire generall, and Edward Nevill the next heire male (unto whom by a will and the same ratified by authority of the Parliament, the Castle of Abergevenny and the greatest part of the lands was fallen) there was great competition, for the title of Abergevenny argued in the High Court of Parliament in the second yeere of King James ; and their severall claimes debated seven severall daies by the learned Counsell of both parts, before the Lords of the Parliament. Yet when as the question of precise right in law was not sufficiently cleered, but both of them in regard of the nobility and honor of their family were thought of every one right worthy of hono∣rable title; and whereas it appeared evidently by most certaine proofes, that the title as well of the Barony of Abergevenny, as of Le Despenser appertained hereditarily to this Family. The Lords humbly and earnestly besought the King, that both parties might be ennobled by way of restitution, who graciously assented thereunto. Here∣upon the Lord Chancellour proposed unto the Lords, first whether the heire male should have the title of Abergevenny or the heire female: and the most voices carried it, that the title of the Barony of Abergevenny should bee restored unto the heire male. And when he propounded secondly, whether the title of the Barony Le De∣spenser should bee restored unto the female, they all with one accord gave their full consent. Which being declared unto the King, he confirmed their determination with his gracious approbation and royall assent. Then was Edward Nevill by the Kings Writ called unto the Parliament by the name of Baron Abergavenney, and in his Parliament Robes betweene two Barons, as the manner is, brought into the house, and placed in his seat above the Baron Audley. And at the very same time, were the letters Patents read, whereby the King restored, erected, preferred, &c. Mary Fane, Baronesse Le Despenser. to the state, degree, title, stile, name, honour, and dignity of Baronesse Le-Despenser, To have and to hold the foresaid state and unto the above named Mary and her heires, and that her heires, successively should bee Barons Le-Despenser, &c. And upon a new question mooved, unto whether the Barony of Abergavenney, or the Barony Le-Despenser, the priority of place was due. The Lords referred this point to the Commissio∣ners for the Office of the Earle Mareschall of England, who after mature delibera∣tion and weighing of the matter, gave definitive sentence for the Barony Le-Despenser, set downe under their hands and signed with their seales, which was read before the Lords of the Parliament, and by order from them entered into the Journall Booke, out of which I have summarily thus much exemplified: John Hastings (for I have no reason to passe it over in silence) held this Castle by homage, Wardship, and marriage when it hapned (as wee reade in the Inquisition) and if there should chance any warre betweene the King of England and the Prince of Wales, 6. Ed. 2. hee was to keepe the Country of Over-went at his owne charges in the best manner he can, for his owne commodity, the Kings behoofe, and the Realme of Englands defense. Burrium. The second little City which Antonine named BURRIUM, and setteth downe twelve miles from Gobannium, standeth where the River Birthin and Uske meete in one streame. The Britans at this day, by transposing of the letters, call it Brunebegy for Burenbegy, and Caer Uske: Giraldus tearmeth it Castrum Oscae, that is, The Castle of Uske, Uske. and we Englishmen, Uske. At this day it can shew nothing but the ruines of a large and strong Castle, situate most pleasantly betweene the River Uske, and Oilwy a Riveret, which beneath it runneth from the East by Ragland, a faire house of the Earle of Worcesters, built Castle-like. The third City which Antonine nameth ISCA, and LEGIO SECUNDA, is on the other side of Uske twelve Italian miles just distant from BURRIUM, Isca Legionis. C er Lheon ar Uske. as hee hath put it downe. The Britans call it Caer Leon, and Caer LEON ar Uske, that is, The City of the Legion upon Uske, of the second Legion Augusta, which also is called Britannica Secunda. This Legion being ordained by the Emperour Augustus, and translated by Claudius out of Germany into Britaine, under the conduct of Vespasian, being ready at his command, when he aspired to bee Emperour, and which procu∣red the Legions in Britaine to take his part, was heere at last placed in Garison by Julius Frontinus (as it seemeth) against the Silures. How great this ISCA was in those dayes listen unto our Girald out of his Booke called Itinerarium Cambriae, who thus describeth it out of the ruines. It was an ancient and Authenticke City excellently well built in old time by the Romanes with bricke Walles. Heere may a man see many footings of the antique nobility and dignity it had, mighty and huge Palaces with golden pinacles in times past, resembling the proud statelinesse of the Romanes, for that it had beene found first by Romane Princes, and beautified with goodly buildings. There may you behold a giant-like Towre, notable and brave baines, the remaines of Temples, and Theatres, all compassed in with faire walles, which are partly yet standing. There may one finde in every place, as well within the circuit of the Wall, as without, houses under ground, water pipes and Vaults within the earth, and (that which you will count among all the rest worth observation) you may see every where ho e houses made wondrous artificially, breathing forth heate very closely at certaine narrow Tunnels in the sides. Heere lye enterred two noble Protomar∣tyrs of greater Britaine, and next after Alban and Amphibalus the very principall heere crowned with Martyrdome, namely Julius and Aaron: and both of them had in this City a goodly Church dedicated unto them. For, in antient times there had beene three passing faire Churches in this City: One of Julius the Martyr, beautified with a chaire of Nunnes devoted to the service of God: A second founded in the name of blessed Aaron his compa∣nion, and ennobled with an excellent Order of Chanons. Amphibalus also, the Teacher of Saint Alban and a faithfull informer of him unto faith was borne heere. The site of the City is excellent, upon the River Oske, able to beare a prety Vessell at an high water from the Sea, and the City is fairely furnished with woods and medowes: heere it was that the Romane Embassadours repaired unto the famous Court of that great King Arthur. Where Dubri∣tius also resigned the Archiepiscopall honour unto David of Menevia, when the Metropoli∣tane See was translated from hence to Menevia. Thus much out of Giraldus. But for the avouching and confirming of the Anti∣quity of this place, I thinke it not impertinent to adjoyne heere those antique In∣scriptions lately digged forth of the ground, which the right reverend Father in God Francis Godwin Bishop of Landaffe, a passing great lover of venerable Antiquity and of all good Literature, hath of his courtesie imparted unto me. In the yeere 1602. in a medow adjoyning, there was found by ditchers a certaine image of a per∣sonage girt and short trussed, bearing a quiver (but head, hands and feet were broken off) upon a pavement of square tile in checker worke: also a fragment of an Altar with this Inscription engraven in great capitall letters three inches long, erected by Haterianus the Lieutenant Generall of Augustus and Propretour of the Province Cilicia. The next yeere following, These Inscrip∣tions are to be seene at Ma∣thern in the Bi∣shop of Lan∣daffes house. hard by, was this Table also gotten out of the ground, which prooveth that the foresaid Image was the personage of Diana: and that her Temple was repaired by Titus Flavius Posthumius Varus, an old souldier haply of a Band of the second Legion. T. FL. POSTUMIUS VARUS V. C. LEG. TEMPL. DIANAE RESTITUIT. Veteranu Cohortis. Also, a votive Altar, out of which GETA the name of Caesar may seeme then to have beene rased, what time as he was made away by his brother Antonine Bassi∣anus, and proclaimed an Enemy, yet so, as by the tract of the letters it is in some sort apparent. PRO SALUTE AUGG. N. N. SEVERI ET ANTONI∣NI ET GETAE CAES. P. SALTIENUS P. F. MAE∣CIA THALAMUS HADRI. PRAEF. LEG. II. AUG. C. VAMPEIANO, In printed Co∣pies, Claudius Pompeianum and L llianus Avitus Coss. Anno Christi 210. ET LUCILIAN. This most beautifull Altar also though maimed and dismembred, was there found, which I thinke is thus to be made up. Also these fragments. Centurio. 7. VECILIANA. VIII. 7. VALER. MAXSIMI. Moreover a little before the comming in of the English Saxons, There was a Schoole heere of 200. Philosophers, who being skilfull in Astronomy and all other Arts, diligently observed the course and motion of the Starres, as wrote Alexander Elsebiensis, a rare Au∣thor and hard to be found; Thomas James. out of whom Thomas James of Oxford (a learned man and a true lover of Bookes, who wholly addicted to learning, and now laboriously sear∣ching the Libraries of England, to the publique good purposeth that (God blesse his labour, which will be to the great benefit of all Students) hath copied out very many notes for me. In the Raigne of Henry the Second (what time Giraldus wrote) it seemeth that this City was of good strength. For Yrwith of Caer Leon a coura∣geous and hardy Britan, defended it a great while against the English, untill he was vanquished by the King, and so disseized of the possession thereof. But now, that it may serve for an ensample, that as well Cities have fatall periods of their flourishing state, as men of their lives; it is decaied, and become a very small Towne, which in times past was of that greatnesse and reaching out so farre in length on both sides of the River, that Saint Julians, an house of the late Sir William Herbert Knight, was, by report, sometime within the very City, where Saint Julius the Martyrs Church stood, which now is much about a mile out of the Towne. Also, out of the ruines thereof a little beneath, Newport. at the mouth of Vske, grew up Newport, which Giraldus nameth in Latine Novus Burgus, a Towne of later time built, and not un∣knowne, by reason of the Castle and commodiousnesse of the Harbour: in which place there was in times past some one of these Roman High wayes or Streets, whereof Necham hath made mention in these Verses, Intrat, & auget aquas Sabrini fluminis Osca, Praceps, testis erit Julia Strata mihi. Vske into Severn headlong runnes and makes his streame to swell, Witnesse with me is Julia Street, that knoweth it full well. This Julia Strata, was no doubt some Port-high way, and (if we may be allowed to make a conjecture) what great absurdity were it to say, that it was cast up and made by Julius Fr ntinus the vanquisher of the Silures? There creepeth, saith Giraldus, in the bounds of this New-burgh or Newport a little River named Nant Pencarn, which can∣not bee waded and passed over but at certaine Fourds, not so much for any depth that the wa∣ter is of, as for the hollownesse of the Chanell, and the easie mudde in the bottome: and it had of old a Fourd named Rydpencarn, that is, The Fourd under the top of a Rocke. Which when Henry the Second King of England chanced at a venture to passe over, even then when it was almost growne out of remembrance, the Welshmen, who were over credulous in beleeving of Prophesies, as if now all had beene sure on the Kings side, and themselves hopelesse of all helpe, were quite out of heart and hope of good successe, because Merlin Silvester, the British Apollo, had prophesied, that then the Welshmens power should bee brought under, when a stout Prince with a freckled face (and such a one was King Henry the Second) should passe over that Foord. Under the Saxons Heptarchy, this Region was subject to the mountaine Welsh∣men whom the English called ) who notwithstanding, Dun-settan. as the ancient lawes doe shew, were under the command of the West Saxons. But at the first comming in of the Normans, the Lords Merchers most grievously plagued and an∣noyed them, but especially Hamelin Balun, of whom I spake, Hugh Lacy, Walter and Gilbert, both sirnamed of the house of Clare, Miles of Glocester, Robert Chandos, Pain Fitz-Iohn, Richard Fitz Punt, and Brien of Wallingford: unto whom after that the Kings had once given whatsoever they could get and hold in this tract by subduing the Welsh, some of these before named by little and little reduced under their subjection the upper part of this Shire which they called Over-went: others the lower part which they termed Nether-went. And this Shire is not accounted among the Shires of Wales. This Shire containeth Parish Churches 127. GLAMORGAN-SHIRE. T HE last Country of the Silures was that, Whence came the name of Glamorgan. I thinke, which wee at this day call GLAMORGAN-SHIRE, the Britans Mor∣ganuc, Glath-Morgan, and Glad Vorganuc, that is, The Region of Morganuc: so named, as most suppose, of one Morgan a Prince, as others thinke of Morgan an Abbay. But if I de∣rived it from Mor, which in the British tongue signifieth The Sea ; I know not verily whether I should dally with the trueth or no? Howbeit, I have observed that a Towne in little Britaine standing upon the Sea-coast, now called Morlais, was of Ptolomee and the ancient Gaules tearmed Vorganium or Morganium (for M. and V. consonant are often changed one for another in this tongue) and whence I pray you but from the sea? And this our Morganuc also lieth upon the sea: for, stretching out directly more in length, than it spreadeth in bredth, on the South side it is accoasted with the Severn sea. But where it looketh toward the Land, it hath on the East side Monmouth-shire, on the North Brechnock-shire, and on the West Caermarden-shire bordering upon it. The North part by reason of the Mountaines is rough and unpleasant, which as they bend downe Southward by little and little become more milde and of better soile; and at the foote of them there stretcheth forth a Plaine open to the South-Sunne, in that position of situation which Cato judged to bee the best, and for the which, Plinie so highly commendeth Italie. For, this part of the Country is most pleasant and fruitfull, beautified also on every side with a number of Townes. Jestine a great Lord in the Raigne of William Rufus, The subduing of Glamorgan-shire. Robert Fitz-Haimon. after he had rebelled against Rhese his Prince, and not able to make his part good with him, very rashly, and in∣considerately (which hee afterward repented too late) sent Enion a Nobleman to whom he had affianced his daughter; to procure Robert Fitz Haimon sonne to Hai∣mon Dentatus Lord of Corboil in Normandy, to come out of England and aide him a∣gainst Rhese: who forthwith having mustered certaine forces, and taking for to asso∣ciate him in his journey twelve Knights, 12. Knights. first gave Rhese Battaile and slew him, and afterwards being allured with the fertility of the Country, whereof before hand he made full account to be Lord, turning his power upon Jestine himselfe, because hee had not kept touch with Enion nor performed his promise, easily thrust him out of his ancient Inheritance, and shared the Country among his Companions. The hard and barraine hill Country he granted to the said Enion, the more fertile parts he di∣vided betweene him and those twelve Knights whom he tearmed Peres, on this con∣dition, that they should hold them in Fee, and vassallage of him as their chiefe Lord, to main∣taine one another in common with their aides and auxiliary forces; to defend every one his owne Ward in his Castle of Caerdiffe, Caerdiffe. and to bee present and assist him in his Courts in the ad∣ministration of Justice. It shall not be amisse to put downe their names out of a little Pamphlet, which Sir Edward Stradling or Sir Edward Mounsel both Knights men of ancient descent and most skilfull in Antiquity, I wot not whether (for it goeth abroad under both their names) wrote concerning this matter. And these be their names, William of London, or de Londres. Richard Granvil. Pain Turbervill. Oliver Saint John. Robert de Saint Quintin. Roger Bekeroul. William Easterling, for that he was borne in Germanie, whose heires are now called Stradlings. Gilbert Hamfranvill. Richard Siward. John Fleming. Peter Soore. Reinald Sully. The River Remnie falling from the Mountaines, is the limite on the East side, whereby this Country is divided from Monmouth-shire ; and Remnie in the British tongue signifieth to Divide. Not farre from it where the River holdeth on his course through places hardly passable, among the hilles, in a Marish ground are to bee seene the tottering walles of Caer-philli Castle, Caer Philli. which hath beene of so huge a bignesse, and such a wonderfull peece of worke beside, that all men well neere say, it was a garison fort of the Romans. Neither will I deny it, although I cannot as yet perceive by what name they cal∣led it: and yet it may seeme to have beene re-edified anew, considering it hath a Chappell built after the Christians manner (as I was enformed by John Sanford a man singular well learned, and of exact judgement) who diligently tooke view of it. In later ages it was the possession of the Clares Earles of Glocester descended from Fitz-Haimon aforesaid; neither doe any of our Chronicles make mention thereof before king Edward the Seconds time. For then, after that the Spensers by underhand practises had set the King, Queene, and Barons at debate, the Barons besieged a long time Hugh Spenser the yonger whom they called Hugolin herein, and could not prevaile. By this river also (but the place is not certainely knowne) Faustus a very good sonne, as Ninnius writeth, of Vortigern so bad a father, built a great Place ; where, with other holy men hee prayed daily unto God, that himselfe, whom his father, committing most abominable incest had begotten of his owne daughter might not be punished grievously for his fathers faults, also that his father might at length repent heartily, and his native Country be eased from the bloudy warres of the Saxons. A little be∣neath, hath Ptolomee placed the mouth of RATOSTABIUS or RATOSTABIUS, The mouth of Ratostabius Traith Taff. using a maimed word in stead of Traith Taff, that is, The sandy Trith of the River Taff. For, there the said River Taff, sliding downe from the Hilles, runneth toward the Sea, by Landaff, Landaff. that is, The Church by Taff, a small City and of small reputation, situate somewhat low, yet a Bishops See, having within the Dioecesse 154. Parishes, and adorned with a Cathedrall Church consecrated to Saint Telean Bishop of the same: which Church German and Lupus, French Bishops, then erected, when as they had suppressed the Heresie of Pelagius that was dangerously spread all Britaine over, History of Landaff. and preferred Dubricius a most holy man to bee the first Bishop there, unto whom Meurioke a British Lord freely gave all the land that lyeth betweene the Ri∣vers Taff and Elei. Caerdiffe. From hence goeth Taff, to Caer diff, called of the Britans Caer∣did a proper fine Towne (as Townes goe in this Country) and a very commodious Haven: which the foresaid, Fitz Haimon, fortified with a Wall and Castle, that it might bee both a seat for warre and a Court of Justice: wherein, beside a Band of choise soldiers those twelve Knights were bound to keepe Castle-guard. Howbeit a few yeeres after, Yuor Bach a British Mountainer, a little man of person but of great and resolute courage, marching with a Band of men by night, without any stirre suddenly surprised, tooke Prisoner William Earle of Glocester, Fitz Haimons daugh∣ters sonne, together with his wife and young sonne, and detained them in hold with him, untill he had made him full satisfaction for all wrongs and losses. But how, Ro∣bert Curthose, Robert Cur∣those Duke of Normandy. William the Conquerours eldest sonne, a man over venterous and foole hardy in warlique exploits, quite put by his hope of the Crowne of England by his younger brethren and bereft of both his eyes, lived untill he was an old man in this Castle, you may see if you please in our Historians, and understand withall, that royall Parentage is never assured either of ends, or safe security. Scarce three miles from the mouth of Taff, in the very bending in of the shore, there lye aflote as it were two small, but pleasant Islands, separated one from another and from the maine Land with narrow in-lets of the Sea. Sully, haply so called of the Silures. The hithermore is called Sullie, of the Towne right over against it, which tooke the name, as it is thought, of Robert Sully (for it fell to his part in the division) if you would not rather have him to take his name of it. Barry. The farther more is named Barry, of Baruch an holy man buried there, who as he gave name to the place, so the place gave the sirname after∣wards to the Lords thereof. For that noble Family of Vicounts Barries in Ireland had their originall from hence. In a Rocke, or cliffe heereof by the sea side, saith Giral∣dus, there appeareth a very little chincke into which if you lay your eare you shall heare a noise as it were of Smithes at worke, one while the blowing of bellowes, another while the stri∣king of sledge and hammer, sometime the sound of the Grindstone and iron tooles rubbing a∣gainst it, the hissing sparkes also of steele-gads within holes, as they are beaten, yea and the puffing noise of fire burning in the furnace. Now, I should easily bee perswaded that such a sound may come of the sea water closely getting into the Rocke, were it not the same continued as well when the sea ebbeth at a low water when the shore is bare, as it doth at an high water when it is full sea. Not unlike to this was the place which Clemens Alexandrinus ma∣keth mention of in the seventh Booke of his Stromata in these words. They that have written Histories doe say, A wonderfull Cave or hole. that in the Isle of Britaine, there is a certaine hole or Cave un∣der the bottome of an hill, and on the toppe thereof a gaping chaune or chinck: And when∣soever the winde is gathered into that hole, and tossed to and fro in the wombe or concavity thereof, there is heard above a sound of Cymbals. For, the winde driven backe gives the stronger sound. Beyond these Islands, the Shire runneth directly Westward, and giveth en∣trance and passage to one River, Cowbridge. upon which more within the Land, standeth Cow∣bridge (the Britans, of the Stone-bridge call it Pont-van ) a Merdare Towne, and the second of those three which Fitz Haimon the Conquerour kept for himselfe. Now, whereas Antonine the Emperour in this very Coast, at the same distance from ISCA, Bovium. placed BOVIUM, which also is corruptly read BOMIUM, my conje∣cture liked me so well, that I have beene of opinion, this Towne was the said BO∣VIUM: but seeing that three miles from hence there standeth Bovirion, which fitly accordeth in sound with Bovium, so love mee trueth, I dare not seeke for BO∣VIUM elsewhere. And that it is no strange and new thing that places should bee fitted with names from Kine and Oxen, I report me to Bosphorus in Thracia, Bovia∣num in Samnium, and Bauli in Italie, as it were, Boalia, if we may beleeve Symmachus. But let this one argument serve for all; fifteene miles from BOVIUM, hath An∣tonine placed, even with a Latine name the Towne NIDUM, which although our Antiquaries have beene this great while a hunting after in vaine: yet, at the very same distance there sheweth it selfe Neath, Neath. a Towne very well knowne, retaining still the old name, in manner whole and sound: and heere at La twit, that is, The Church of Iltut, that joyneth close thereto, are seene the foundations of many houses, for it had divers Streets in old time. A little from hence in the very bout well neere of the shore standeth Saint Donats Castle, Saint Donats. Stradling. a faire Habitation of the anci∣ent and notable Family of the Stradlings: neere unto which, were very lately dig∣ged up, Antique peeces of coine. antique peeces of Romane money, but those especially of the thirty Ty∣rants, yea and some of Aemilianus and Marius, which are seldome found. The River Ogmor somewhat higher, Ogmor river. maketh himselfe way into the Sea, falling downe from the mountaines by Coitie, which belonged sometimes to the Turbevills, after∣wards to the Gamages, and now to Sir Robert Sidney Vicount Lisle, in right of his wife: also by Ogmor Castle, which came from the Family of London to the Dutchy of Lancaster. A fountaine ebbing and flowing. Some few miles from hence there is a Well at Newton (as Sir John Stradling a very learned Knight hath signified unto me) a little Towne, on the banke of the River Ogmor Westward, an hundred paces well neere from Severn side, in a sandy plaine. The water thereof is none of the cleerest, Sandfords well. yet pure enough and good for use: It never springeth and walmeth up to the brinke, but by certaine staires folke goe downe into the Well. At any flowing of the Sea (in Summer time) you shall hardly get up a dish full of water: Whereas if you come anon when it ebbeth, you may well lade up water with a good bigge bucket or paile. The like instability remaineth also in Winter time, saving that it is nothing so evident, by reason of the Veines of water comming in from above by showres, and otherwise. Many of the Inhabitants thereabout men of good credite constantly avouched thus much unto me. But I, distrusting Fame, that oftentime doth but prate, went my selfe of late once or twice to the said Well. For even then had I great desire to write thus much unto you. When I was first come unto the place, and had stayed the third part of an houre viewing and considering every thing (while Severn surged and rose high, and no body came thither to draw) the water was fallen about three inches. I goe my waies. And not long after when I was returned againe, I finde it to be risen a foote higher. The compasse of this Well beneath within the walles is almost sixe foote. Concerning which my Muse also enditeth this Dittie. Te Nova-Villa fremens, odioso murmure Nympha Inclamat Sabrina: Soloque inimica propinquo, Evomit infestas ructu violenter arenas. Damna pari sentit vitinia sorte: sedilla Fonticulum causata tuum. Quem virgo, legendo Littus, ad amplexus vocitat: latet ille vocatus Antro, & luctatur contra. Namque astus utrique est Continuo motu refluus, tamen ordine dispar. Nympha fluit propiùs: Fons defluit. Illa recedit. Isteredit. Sic livor inest & pugna perennis. With troublous noise and roaring loud, the Severn Nymph doth cry, New-towne, on thee; and bearing spite unto the ground thereby, Casts up and sends with violence maine drifts of hurtfull sand. The neighbour parts feele equall losse, by this her heavie hand: But on thy little Well she laies the weight, which she would woo And faine embrace, as Virgin she along the shore doth goe. Call'd though he be, he lurkes in den, and striveth hard againe, For, ebbe and flow continually by tides they keepe, both twaine Yet diversly: for as the Nymph doth rise, the Spring doth fall, Goe she backe, he comes on, in spite and fight continuall. A fountaine at Cales or Cadiz. The like Fountaine Polybius reporteth to bee at Cadyz, and this reason hee giveth thereof, namely that the winde or aire, when it is deprived of his wonted issues, returneth within forth, and so by shutting and stopping up the passages and veines of the Spring, keep∣eth in the waters, and contrariwise when the surface thereof is voide and empty of water the veines of the source or Spring are unstopped and set free, and so the water then boileth up in great abundance. From hence coasting along the shore, you come within the sight of Kinefeage, the Castle in old time of Fitz-Haimon himselfe; also of Margan, hard by the sea side, sometime an Abbay founded by William Earle of Glocester, but now the Habitation of the worshipfull Family of the Maunsells, Knights. Neere unto this Margan, in the very toppe of an Hill called Mynyd Margan, there is erected of exceeding hard grit, a Monument or grave-stone, foure foote long, and one foote broad with an Inscription, which whosoever shall happen to reade, the ignorant common people dwelling thereabout, give it out upon a credulous errour, that hee shall bee sure to dye within a little while after. Let the Reader therefore looke to himselfe, if any dare reade it; for, let him assure himselfe that hee shall for certaine dye after it. CAERMARDĪ Comitatus in quo DIMETAE Olim habitarunt. Those latter words I reade thus Aeternali in domo, that is, In an eternall house: For, Sepulchres in that age, Eternall habi∣tations. were tearmed AETERNALES DOMUS, that is, Eternall habitations. Moreover, betweene Margan and Kingseage by the high way side, there lyeth a stone foure foote long with this Inscription. PUNP IUS CAR ANTOPIUS. Which the Welsh Britans by adding and changing letters, thus reade and make this interpretation, as the right reverend Bishop of Landaff did write to mee, who gave order that the draught of this Inscription should be taken likewise for my sake. PIM BIS AN CAR ANTOPIUS, that is, The five fingers of freinds or neigh∣bours killed us. It is verily thought to bee the Sepulchre of Prince Morgan, from whom the Country tooke name, who was slaine, as they would have it, eight hun∣dred yeeres before Christs Nativity. But Antiquaries know full well, that these Characters and formes of letters be of a farre later date. After you are past Margan, Nidus flu. i. the river Neath. the shore shooteth forth into the North-East, by Aber-Avon, a small Mercate Towne upon the River Avons mouth (whereof it tooke the name) to the River Nid or Neath infamous for a quick-sand, upon which stands an ancient Towne of the same name, which Antonine the Emperour in his Itinerary called NIDUM. Which, when Fitz-Haimon made himselfe Lord of this Country, fell in the partition to Richard Granvills share, Nidum the towne Neath. who having founded an Abbay under the very Townes side, and consecrated his owne portion to God and to the Monkes, returned againe to his owne ancient and faire inheritance, which he had in England. Logho ▪ Gower. Beyond this River Neath, whatsoever lieth betweene it and the River Loghor, which boundeth this shire in the West, wee call Gower: the Britans and Ninnius, Guhir: wherein, as he saith, the sonnes of Keian the Scot planted themselves, and tooke up a large roome, Th. Walsingh. untill that by Cuneda a British Lord they were driven out. In the Raigne of Henry the First, Henry Earle of Warwicke wonne it from the Welsh, but by a convey∣ance and composition, passed betweene William Earle of Warwicke and King Henry the Second, Booke of Neth Monastery. Joh. R. 5. it came to the Crowne. Afterward King Iohn gave it unto William Breos who had taken Arthur Earle of Britaine prisoner, to bee held by service of one Knight for all service: and his heires successively held it not without troubles unto King Edward the Seconds daies: for then, William Breos, when he had alienated and sold this inheritance to many, and in the end by mocking and disappointing all others, set Hugh Spenser in possession thereof, to curry favour with the King. And this was one cause, among other things, that the Nobles hated the Spensers so deadly, and rashly shooke off their Allegeance to the King. Howbeit this Gower came to the Mowbraies by an heire of Breos. This is now divided into the East part and the West. Swinsey. In the East part Swinesey, is of great account, a Towne so called by the Eng∣lishmen, of Sea-Swine, but the Britans Aber-Taw of the River Taw running by it; which, the foresaid Henry, Earle of Warwicke fortified. But there is a Towne farre more ancient than this by the River Loghor, which Antonine the Emperour called LEUCARUM, Leucarum Loghor. and wee, by the whole name, Loghor. Where, a little after the death of King Henry the First, Howel Ap Meredic invading the Englishmen on a sud∣den, with a power of the mountainers slew divers men of quality and good account. Beneath this, lyeth West-Gower, and by reason of two armes of the Sea winding in, on either side one, it becommeth a Biland, more memorable for the fruitfulnesse, than the Townes in it, and in times past of great name, in regard of Kined canonized a Saint, who lived heere a solitary life: of whom if you desire to know more, reade our Countryman Capgrave, who hath set out his miracle with great com∣mendation. Since this Country was first conquered by the English. The Lords thereof were those that lineally descended from Fitz-Haimon, Lords of Gla∣morgan-shire. as Earle of Glocester, Clares, Spensers, Beauchamps, and one or two Nevils: and by a daughter of Nevill, who came likewise of the Spensers bloud, Richard the Third King of England: But when he was slaine, king Henry the Seventh entred upon the inheritance of this Country, and gave it to his unkle Iaspar Duke of Bedford: and when hee dyed without issue, the king re∣sumed it unto his owne hands, and left it to his sonne king Henry the Eighth: whose sonne king Edward the Sixth sold the greatest part thereof to Sir William Herbert, whom hee had created Earle of Pembrock and Baron of Cardiff. But of the race of those twelve knights there remaine onely in this shire the Stradlings, a notable house and of long continuance, the Turbervills, and some of the Flemings: the greatest man of which house dwelleth at Flemingston, now corruptly called Flemston, as one would say, Flemingstone which tooke the name of them. And in England, there are remaining yet the Lord Saint Iohn of Bletso, the Granvills in Devonshire ; and the Siwards, as I am enformed, in Somerset-shire. The issue male of all the rest is long since extinct and worne out, and their lands by daughters passed over to divers houses with sundry alterations. Parishes 118. DIMETAE. P Linie was of opinion that the SILURES inhabited also the other part beside of this Country, West-Wales. which bearing out farther Westward, is called in English by some, West-Wales, and containeth Caermarden-shire, Pembrock-shire, and Cardigan-shire : But Ptolomee, who knew Britaine farre better, placed heere another people, whom he called DIMETAE, and DEMETAE. Gildas likewise and Ninnius both, have used the name of DEMETIA for this Tract. Whereupon, the Britans that inhabite it, changing M. into F. according to the propriety of their tongue commonly call it at this day Difed. If it would not be thought strained curiosity, I would derive this denomina∣tion of the Demetae, from Deheu Meath, that is, A plaine champion to∣ward the South: like as the Britans themselves have named all this South-Wales, Deheubarth, that is, The South part: yea and those verily who in∣habited another champion Country in Britaine were called in old time, Meatae. Neither, I assure you, is the site of this Region disagreeing from this sig∣nification: For, when you are come hither once, by reason that the high hils gently settle downeward, and grow still lower and lower, it spreadeth by little and little in∣to a plaine and even champion Country. CAERMARDEN-SHIRE. C AERMARDEN-SHIRE, Caer Marden-shire. is plenteous enough in Corne, sto∣red abundantly with Cartaile and in some places yeeldeth pit cole for fewell. On the East side it is limited with Glamorgan, and Brechnock-shires, on the West with Pembrock-shire, on the North with Cardigan-shire severed from it by the River Tivie running betweene, and on the South with the Ocean, which with so great a Bay or Creeke getteth within the Land, that this Countrey seemeth as it were for very feare to have shrunke backe, and withdrawne it selfe more inwardly. Upon this Bay, Kidwelly. Kidwelly first offereth it selfe to our sight, the Territory whereof, K tani the Scot his sonnes held for a time, untill they were driven out by Cuneda the Britan. But now it is counted part of the inheritance of the Dutchy of Lancaster by the heires of Maurice of London or De Londres: who making an outroad hither out of Glamorgan-shire, after a dangerous war made himselfe Lord heereof, and fortified old Kidwelly with a wall and Castle to it, which now for very age is growne to decay and standeth, as it were, forlet and forlorne. For, the Inhabitants having passed over the little River Vendraeth Vehan, built a new Kidwelly, entised thither by the commo∣dity of the haven, which notwithstanding at this day being choked with shelves and barres, is at this present of no great use. Whiles Maurice of London invaded these parts, Guenliana, a woman of man∣ly courage. Guenliana the wife of Prince Gruffin, a stout and resolute woman in the highest degree, to recover the losses and declining state of her husband, came with displai∣ed banner into the field and fiercely assailed him, but the successe not answerable to her courage, shee with her sonne Morgan, and other men of especiall note (as Gi∣rald recordeth) was slaine in battaile. By Hawis or Avis the daughter and heire of Sir Thomas of London: this passing faire and large patrimony, together with the Title of Lord of Ogmor and Kidwelly came unto Patricke-Chaworth, and by his sonne Pa∣trickes daughter, unto Henry Earle of Lancaster. Now the heires of the said Mau∣rice of London (as we learne out of an old Inquisition) for this inheritance, Lords of Og mor and Kid∣welly. were bound to this service, that if their Soveraigne Lord the King, or his chiefe Justice came into the parts about Kidwelly with an Army, they should conduct the foresaid Army with their banners and their people through the middest of Nethland as farre as to Loghar. A few miles be∣neath Kidwelly, River Tovie. the River Tovie, which Ptolomee calleth TOBIUS falleth into the the Sea, after he hath passed through this Region from North-East to South, first by Lanandiffry, so called, as men thinke, of Rivers meeting together; which Hoel the sonne of Rhese overthrew for malice that hee bare unto the English: Dinevor. then by Dine∣vor, a princely Castle, standing aloft upon the top of an hill, and belonging unto the Princes of South Wales whiles they flourished: and last of all, by Caer Marden, which the Britans themselves call Caer-Firdhin, Maredunum. Caer merdin. Ptolomee, MARIDUNUM, Antonine, MU∣RIDUNUM, who endeth his Journeies there, and through negligence of the transcri∣bers is in this place not well used. For they have confounded the Journeies from Galena to Isca, and from Maridunum to Viriconium. This is the chiefe City of the country, for medowes and woods pleasant, and in regard of antiquity to be respected; Compassed about very properly, as Giraldus saith, with bricke walles, which are partly yet standing upon the famous river Tovit, able to beare small ships, although there be now a barre of sand cast up against the very mouth thereof. Merlin. In this City was borne the Divinour or Prophet. Tages of the Britans, I meane Merlin: For like as Tages being the sonne of an evill Angell taught his Countrimen the Tuscans the art of Sooth saying, so this Merlin the sonne of an Incubus Spirit, devised for our Britans prophesies, nay rather meere phantasti∣call dreames. Whereby, in this Island he hath been accounted among the credulous and unskilfull people a most renowned Prophet. Straight after the Normans entring into Wales, this City was reduced (but I wot not by whose conduct) under their subjection, and for a long time sore afflicted with many calamities and distresses, be∣ing oftentimes assaulted, once or twice set on fire, first by Gruffin ap Rise, then by Rise the said Gruffins brother: at which time, Henry Turbervill an Englishman succoured the Castle, and hewed downe the Bridge. But afterwards by the meanes of Gil∣bert de Clare, who fortified both the walles thereof, and the Castles adjoyning, it was freed from these miseries: and being once eased of all grievances, and in security, endured afterwards more easily from time to time the tempests of warre and all as∣saults: And the Princes of Wales of the English bloud, I meane the first begotten sonnes of the Kings of England, ordained heere their Chauncery and Exchequer, for all South Wales. Cantred Bitham. Cantred. Neere unto this City on the East side lyeth Cantred-Bichan, that is, The lesse Hun∣dred (for the Britans terme a portion of land that containeth 100. Villages a Cantred ) in which, beside the ruines of Careg Castle situate upon a Rocke, rising on every side steepe and upright, Caves under the ground. there are many under-mines or caves of very great widenesse within the ground, now covered all over with green-sord and turfe, wherein it is thought the multitude unable to beare armes hid themselves, during the heate of warre: there is also heere a Fountaine, that as Giraldus writeth, Twice in foure and twenty houres ebbing and twice flowing resembleth the unstable motions of the maine Sea. Cantredmaur. But on the North-East side, there stretcheth it selfe a great way out, Cantredmaur, that is, The great hundred, a most safe refuge for the Britans in times past, as being thicke set with woods, combersome to travaile in, by reason the waies are intricate by the windings in and out of the hils, Southward stand Talcharn and Lhan-Stephan Castles upon rockes of the Sea, Talcharn. Lhan-Stephan. which are most notable witnesses of martiall valour and prowesse as well in the English as in the Welsh. Beneath Talcharn, Taff sheddeth it selfe into the Sea, by the side whereof was in times past that famous Twy Gwin ar Taff, Taff River. that is, The white house upon the River Taff, because it was built of white Hazels for a summer house: where, in the yeere of our Redemption 914. Haelius. Hoel, sirnamed Dha, that is, Good, Prince of Wales, in a frequent Assembly of his States (for there met there beside others, of the Clergie one hundred and forty) abrogated the an∣cient ordinances, and established new lawes for his Subjects, as the Prooeme to the very lawes themselves doe witnesse: In which place afterward, a little Abbay na∣med White land, Whiteland. was built. Not farre from whence is Killmayn Lhoyd ; where, of late daies certaine country people hapned upon an earthen Vessell, in which was hour∣ded a mighty deale of Romane Coine, Peeces of Ro∣man Coine. of embased silver: from the time of Commo∣dus the Romane Emperour, who first embased silver, unto the fifth Tribuneship of Gordian the third, which fell just with the yeere of Christ 243. Among these, were certaine peeces of Helvius Pertinax, of Marcus Opellius, of Antoninus Diadumenianus, of Julius Verus Maximus the sonne of Maximinus, of Calius Balbivus, of Clodius Pupienus, of Aquilia Severa the wife of Elagabalus and of Sall. Barbia Orbiana, which among Antiquaries are of greatest price and estimation, as being most rare of all others. Now it remaineth that I should relate, how upon the river Tivy, that separateth this County from Cardigan-shire, New Castle. there standeth New-Castle (for so they call it at this day) which Sir Rhise ap Thomas that warlike Knight who assisted Henry the Seventh when he gat the Crowne, and was by him right worthily admitted unto the Socie∣ty of the Knights of the Garter, renewed: whereas before time it was named Elme∣lin. Which name, if the Englishmen gave unto it of Elme-trees, their conjecture is not to bee rejected, Loventium. who will have it to bee that LOVENTIUM of the DIME∣TAE, whereof Ptolomee maketh mention: For, the Britans call Elmes Llwiffen. But seeing I can finde by no record in Histories, which if the Normans first wrested this Country out of the hands of the Princes of Wales, I am to proceed now or∣derly to the description of Pembroch-shire. It hath Parishes 87. PENBROK Comitatus olim Pars DEMETARVM PENBROKE-SHIRE. T HE Sea now retyring Southward, and with a mighty com∣passe and sundry Bayes incurving the shores, presseth on e∣very side upon the County of PENBROKE, commonly called PENBROKE-SHIRE, which in the old Bookes is named Legalis Comitatus. The lawfull County of Pembroch, and of some, West-Wales ; unlesse it be in the East side, where Caermarden-shire, and on the North, where a part of Cardigan-shire boundeth upon it. A Country plentifull in Corne, stored with Cat∣taile, and full of marle, and such kinde of fatty earth to make the ground fertile, and not destitute of pit cole. This Land, as saith Giraldus, is apt to beare Wheat, plentifully served with sea-fish and saleable wine, and (that which is farre above the rest, by reason that Ireland confineth so neere upon it) of a very temperate and wholsome aire. First and formost upon the shore descending Southward, Tenby, Tenby a proper fine Towne well governed by a Major, and strongly walled toward the Land, looketh downe into the sea from a dry cliffe, very famous because it is a commodious road for ships, and for abundance also of fish there taken; whereupon in the British tongue it is called Tenby-y-Piscoid, and hath for Magistrates a Major and a Bailiffe. From thence the shore giving backe Westward, Manober Castle. sheweth the Reliques of Manober Castle, which Giraldus calleth, The Mansion of Pyrhus, in whose time as himselfe writeth, It was notably fortified with Towres and Bulwarkes, having on the West side a large Haven, and on the North-West and North under the very walles, an excellent fish-poole, goodly to behold, as well for the beauty thereof, as the depth of the water. From hence runneth the shore along not many miles continuate, but at length the land shrinketh backe on both sides giving place unto the sea, which encroching upon it a great way, Milford Haven. maketh the Haven which the Englishmen call Milford Haven, than which there is not another in all Europe more noble or safer, such variety it hath of nouked Bayes, and so many coves and creekes, for harbour of ships, where∣with the bankes are on every side indented, and that I may use the Poets words: Hic exarmatum terris cingentibus aequor, Clauditur, & placidam discit servare quietem. The Sea disarmed heere of windes, within high banke and hill, Enclosed is, and learnes thereby to be both calme and still. For to make use of the Mariners words and their distinct termes, there are recko∣ned within it 16. Creekes, 5. Baies, and 13. Rodes, knowne every one by their seve∣rall names. Neither is this Haven famous for the secure safenesse thereof more, than for the arrivall therein of King Henry the Seuenth a Prince of most happy memory, who from hence gave forth unto England then hopelesse the first signall to hope well, and raise it selfe up, when as now it had long languished in civill miseries and domesticall calamities within it selfe. Upon the innermore and East Creeke of this Haven, Pembroke. in the most pleasant Country of all Wales, standeth Penbroke the Shire-towne, one direct street upon a long narrow point all rocke, and a forked arme of Mil∣ford Haven ebbing and flowing close to the Towne walles on both sides. It hath a Castle but now ruinate, and two Parish Churches within the wals, and is incorporate of a Major, Bailiffes and Burgesses. But heare Giraldus who thus describeth it, A tongue of the sea shooting forth of Milford Haven, in the forked end, encloseth the principall towne of the whole Country and chiefe place of Dimetia seated upon the ridge of a certaine craggy and long shaped Rocke: And therefore, the Britans called it Penbro, which signifieth as much as a head of the Sea, and wee in our tongue Penbroke. Arnulph of Montgomery brother to Robert Earle of Shrewsbury, first in the time of King Henry the First fortified this place with a Castle, a very weake and slender thing, God wote, of stakes and turfes, which afterwards he returning into England delivered unto Girald of Windsor, his Constable and Captaine, to bee kept with a Garison of few Souldiers: and immediately, the Welshmen of all South Wales laid siege unto the said Castle. The beginning of the Giralds family in Ire∣land. But such resistance made Girald and his company, more upon a resolute courage than with any forcible strength, that they missed of their purpose and dislodged. Afterwards, the said Girald fortified both Towne and Castle; from whence hee invaded the Country, round about it, farre and neere: and at length, that as well his owne estate, as theirs that were his fol∣lowers and dependants, might the better grow to greatnesse in these parts he tooke to wife Nesta sister to Gruffin the Prince, of whom he begat a goodly faire Progeny, by the which (as saith that Giraldus who descended from him) The Englishmen both kept still the Sea Coasts of South Wales, and wonne also the walles of Ireland. For, all those noble families of Giralds or Giraldines in Ireland, whom they call Fitz Girald, fetch their descent from the said Girald. The Roll of Services. In regard of the tenure of this Castle and Towne, of the Castle and Towne likewise of Tinbigh, of the Grange of Kings Wood, of the Commot of Croytarath, and of the Manors of Castle Martin and Tregoire, Reinold Grey at the Coronation of King Henry the Fourth made suite to carry the second sword: but in vaine: For, answere was made, that those Castles and Possessions were in the Kings hands, as Pembroke Towne still is. Upon another Creeke also of this haven, Carew Castle sheweth it selfe, which gave both name and originall to the notable Family de Carew, Carew Castle. who avouch themselves to have beene called aforetime, de Montgomery ; and have beene perswaded, that they are descended from that Arnulph de Montgomery, of whom I spake erewhile. Into this Haven there discharge themselves with their out-lets joyned almost in one, Gledawgh. two rivers, which the Britans tearme Gledawh, that is, if you interpret it, Swords: whereupon themselves use to tearme it Aber du gledhaw, that is, The out-let of two swords. Hard by the more Easterly of them standeth Slebach, a Commandery in times past of Saint Johns Knights of Jerusalem, which with other lands, Wizo and Wal∣ter his sonne, gave in old time unto that holy Order of Knighthood, that they might serve as Gods Knights to recover the Holy Land. That part of this Country which lyeth beyond the Haven, and hath onely these two Rivers to water it, the Britans doe call Ros, making the name answerable to the thing, for that it lyeth for the most part all low on a flat, and greene plaine. Flemings in Wales. This Tract was inhabited by Flemings out of the Low Countries, who by the permission of King Henry the First were planted heere, when the Ocean by making breaches in the bankes had overwhelmed a great part of the said Low Countries. These are distinctly knowne still from the Welsh, both by their speech and man∣ners, and so neere joyned they are in society of the same language with Englishmen, who come nighest of any Nation to the low Dutch Tongue, that this their little Country is tearmed by the Britans Little England beyond Wales. Little England beyond Wales. A Nation this is, as saith Giraldus, strong and stout, and continually enured in warres with the Welsh: a Nation most accustomed to seeke gaine by clothing; by traffique also and merchandise by sea and land, undertaking any paines and perills whatsoever. A Nation of very great power, and as time and place requireth, ready by turnes to take plough in hand and till the ground, as rea∣dy also to goe into the field and fight it out: And that I may adde thus much moreover; a Nation most loyally devoted to the Kings of England, and as faithfull to Englishmen: and which in the time of Giraldus, was wonderfull skilfull in Sooth-saying by the In∣spection of Beasts inwards: whose worke also is heere seene (as they are a people passing industrious) namely, The Flemish High way reaching out a great length. The Welshmen have many a time banded all their Forces in one, and to recover this country belonging sometimes unto their ancestors, have violently set upon these Fle∣mings and overrunne their lands, spoiling and wasting where ever they went: yet they most courageously have alwayes from time to time defended their estates, their name, and life. Whereupon concerning them, and King William Rufus, the Historian Malmesbury writeth thus. Many a time and often King William Rufus had but small successe against the Welsh men: which any man may well mervaile at, considering that alwaies otherwise, he spread most fortunately in all adventures of Warre. But I take it; that as the unevennesse of the ground, and sharpnesse of the ayre maintained their Rebellion; so the same empeached his valour: But King Henry who now Reigneth, a man of an excellent wit, found meanes to frustrate all their devices, by placing Flemings in their Country, who might be alwaies ready to represse and keepe them in. And in the fifth booke, King Henry with ma∣ny a warlike expedition went about to force the Welsh men, who ever and anon rose up in Rebelli∣on, for to yeeld and submit themselves: and resting in the end upon this good and holsome po∣licie, for to take downe and abate their swelling pride, he brought over thither all the Flemings that dwelt in England. For, a number of them who in those daies, in regard of his Moth rs by her Fathers side flocked thither, were closely shrowded in England▪ in so much they for their multitude seemed burdensome unto the Realme. Wherefore, he sent them altogether with their substance, goods, Wives, and Children unto Ros a Country in Wales, as it were ∣to a common avoidance, thereby both to purge and clense his owne Kingdome, and also to quaile and represse the rash boldnesse of his enemies there. By the more westward of these two Rivers, Harford we is Harford West, called by the English men in times past Haversord, and by the Britans Hulphord, a faire Towne and of great resort, situate upon an hill side, having scarce one even streete, but is steepe one way or other, which being a Coun∣tie by it selfe, hath for Magistrates, a Major, a Sheriffe, and two Bailiffs. The re∣port goeth, that the Earles of Clare fortified it with Rampier and Wall on the North side, Filium Tan credi. and we read that Richard Earle of Clare made R. Fitz-Tancred, Castellan of this Castle. Beyond Ros, there shooteth out with a mighty front farre into the West Ocean, a great Promontory, Octopitarum which Ptolomee called OCTOPITARUM, the Britans Pebidiauc, and Cantred Devi ; we Saint Davids land. A stony, barren, and unfruitfull ground, as Giraldus saith, Saint David Laud. Neither clad with Woods, nor garnished heere and there with Rivers, ne yet adorned with Medows, lying alwaies open to windes onely and stormes. Yet a retyring place for most holy men, and a nurserie of them. For, Calphurnius a Britaine Priest, as some (I know not how truly) have written, heere in the vale of Ros begat of his Wife Concha Sister to Saint Martin of Tours, Saint Patr Patricke the Apostle of Ireland and Devi a most religious Bishop translated the Archiepiscopall See from Isca Legionum into the most remote and farthest angle heereof, even to Menew, or Menevia: which af∣terwards the Britans, of his name called Twy Dewy, that is, Devi his house, the Saxons Dauy , Saint David the English men at this day Saint Davids ; and was for a long time an Archbishops See. But by occasion of a pestilence that contagiously raged in this Country, whereby the Pall was translated into little Britaine in France, to Dole, this Archiepiscopall dignity had an end. Yet in the foregoing ages the Welsh men commensed an action heere about against the Archbishop of Canterbury, Me∣tropolitane of England and Wales, but they were cast in the Law. What this Saint Davids was, and what maner of thing in times past, a man can hardly tell, conside∣ring it hath beene so often by Pirates rased: but now it is a very small and poore Citie, and hath nothing at all to make shew of but a faire Church dedicated to Saint Andrew, and David: which, having been many times overthrowne, Petre the Bishop, in the reigne of King John, and his successors, erected in that forme which now it sheweth, in the vale (as they tearme it of Ros ) under the Towne: and hard by it standeth the Bishops Pallace, and faire houses of the Chaunter (who is next unto the Bishop, for there is no Deane heere) of the Chauncellor, Treasurer, and foure Arch∣deacons who be of the number of the XXII. Canons, all enclosed round within a strong and seemely wall, whereupon they call it the Close. This Promontorie thrusteth it selfe so farre Westward, that in a cleere Sunshine day a man may from thence see Ireland, and from hence is the shortest cut to Ireland: and by Plinies measure, which he tooke false, was from the Silures (for, he thought that the Silures reached thus farre) thirty miles. But that this land ran out farther, and that the forme of the Promontory hath been changed, it may be gathered out of these words of Giraldus. What time (saith he) as King Henry the Second made his abode in Ireland, Bodies of trees in the Sea. by reason of an extraordinary violence of stormes, the sandy shores of this coast were laide bare as farre as to the very hard ground, and the face of the earth which had lien covered many ages before was discovered. Also the trunkes of trees standing in the very Sea, that had aforetime been lopped on every side, yea and the strokes of axes, as if they had been given but yesterday were seene apparantly. Yea and the earth shewed most blacke, and the wood withall of the said trunkes like in all the points to Hebeny: so as it seemed now no shore but a lopped grove: as well empaired through the wonderfull changes of things; either haply from the time of No∣ahs floud, or long after; but, doubtlesse, long agoe, as worne by little and little, and so swallowed up with the rage of the Sea getting alwaies more ground and washing the earth away. Neither were these two lands severed here with any great Sea betweene, as may appeare by a word that King William Rufus cast out: who when he kenned Ireland from the rocks and cliffes of this Promontory▪ said (as we read in Giraldus ) that he could easily make a bridge with English Sips; on which he might passe over the Sea on foote into Ireland. Falcons. A noble kinde of Falcons have their Airies here and breed in the Rocks, which King Henry the Second, as the same Giraldus writeth, was wont to preferre before all others. For, of that kinde are those, if the inhabitants thereby doe not deceive me, which the skilfull Faulconers call Peregrines: for, they have (that I may use no o∣ther words than the verses of Augustus Thuanus Esmerius that most excellent P et of our age in that golden booke entituled HIERACOSOPHIOY. Depressus capitis vertex, oblongique tot Corpore pennarum series, pallentia crura, Et graciles digiti ac sparsi, naresque rotundae. Head flat and low, the plume in rewes along The body laid: legges pale and wan are found. With slender clawes and talons there among And those wide spread: the bill is hooked round. But from this Promontory, as the land draweth backward, the Sea with great vio∣lence and assault of waters inrusheth upon a little Region called Keimes, Keimes Barony. Fisgard. which is re∣puted a Barony. In it standeth, First, Fishgard, so called in English of the taking of fish, in British Abergwain, that is, the mouth of the River Gwain, situate upon a steepe Cliffe, New-port. where there is a very commodious harbour and rode for Ships: then Newport at the foote of an high Mountaine by the River Neverns side, in British Tref-draeth, i. the Towne upon the sands, and in Latine Records, Novus Burgus ; which Martin of Tours built, his posterity made an incorporation, adorned with priviledges, and set over it for governement a Portgreve and Bailive: erected also for themselves a Castle over the Towne, Saint Dogmael the Welsh call him Saint Tegwel. Lords of Keimes. Martins. which was their principall seate. Who founded likewise Saint Dog∣males Abbay according to the order of Tours, by the River Tivy low in a vale envi∣roned with hils, unto which the Borrough adjoyning (as many other Townes unto Monasteries) is beholden for the originall thereof. This Barony, Martin of Tours first wrested out of the Welsh mens hands by force and armes, from whose heires successively called Martins, it came by marriage to the Barons of Audley, who held it a long time, untill that in the reigne of Henry the eighth, William Owen that deri∣ved his pedigree from a daughter of Sir Nicholas Martin Knight, after long suit in law for his right, in the end obtained it, and left it to his sonne George: who being a singular lover of venerable antiquity hath informed me, that in this Barony ouer and above three Borroughs, Newport, Fishgard, and Saint Dogmaels, there are twen∣ty Knights fees, and twenty sixe Parishes. Kilgarran. More inward, upon the River Tivy aforesaid is Kilgarran, which sheweth the re∣liques of a Castle built by Girald: but being at this day reduced unto one onely street, it is famous for nothing else but the most plentifull fishing of Salmon. For there, have you that notable Salmon Leap, where the River from on high falleth downright, and the Salmons from out of the Ocean coveting to come up further into the River, when they meete with this obstacle in the way, Salmons leap. bend backe their taile to the mouth, other whiles also to make a greater leap up, hold fast their taile in the mouth, and as they unloose themselves from such a circle, they give a jerk, as if a twig bended into a rondle were sudainely let goe, and so with the admiration of the beholders mount and whip themselves aloft from beneath, as Ausonius hath most elegantly written. Nec te paniceo rutilantem viscere Salma, Transierim, latae cujus vaga verbera caudae Gurgite de medio summas reseruntur in undas. Nor can I thee let passe, all red within, (Salmon) that art, whose jerkes and friskes full oft, From mids of streame and chanell deepe therein With broad taile flirt, to floating waves aloft. There have beene divers Earles of Pembroke out of sundry houses. Earles of Pen∣broke. As for Ar∣nulph of Montgomery, who first wonne it, and was afterwards outlawed, and his Castellan Girald, whom King Henry the First made afterward President over the whole Country, I dare searcely affirme that they were Earles. The first that was stiled Earle of Penbroke was Gilbert, sirnamed Strongbow sonne of Gislebert de Clare, in the time of King Stephen. And hee left it unto his sonne Richard Strongbow, the renowned Conquerour of Ireland, who as Giraldus saith, was descended ex clarâ Clarentium familiâ, that is, out of the noble Family of Clare or Clarence. His onely daughter Isabell brought the same honour to her Husband William named Mareschall (for that his Ancestours had beene by inheritance Mareschals of the Kings Palace ) a man, most glorious both in warre and peace, and Protector of the Kingdome in the minority of King Henry the Third. Concerning whom this pithie Epitaph is extant in Rodburns Annales. Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit Hibernia, Solem Anglia, Mercurium Normannia, Gallia Martem. Whom Ireland once a Saturne found, England a Sunne to be, Whom Normandy a Mercurie, and France Mars, I am he. After him his five sonnes were successively one after another Earles of Penbroke, viz. William called The younger; Richard, who after hee had rebelled against King Henry the Third went into Ireland, See Pag. 407. where hee was slaine in battaile; Gilbert, who in a Tournament at Ware was unhorsed and so killed; Walter, and Anselme, who en∣joyed the honour but a few dayes, who every one dying in a short space without issue, King Henry the Third invested in the honour of this Earledome, William de Valentia, of the house of Lusignian in Poicta his brother by the mother side, who had to wife Joan the daughter of Gwarin de Mont-chensy: by the daughter of the foresaid William Mareschall. After William of Valence, succeeded his sonne Aimar, who under King Edward the First was Regent of Scotland: whose eldest sister Eliza∣beth, and one of his heires wedded unto John Lord Hastings, brought this Dignity unto a new Family: For, Laurence Hastings his grandsonne, Lord of Welshford and Abergevenny was made Earle of Penbroke by vertue of King Edward the Third his Brieffe. The Copie whereof I thinke good to set downe heere, that wee may see what was the right by heires generall in these honorary Titles. Rex omnibus ad quos, &c. salutem. The King, to all unto whom, &c. Greeting. Know yee, that the good presage of circumspection and vertue, which wee have conceived by the towardly youth and happy beginnings of our most welbeloved cozin Laurence Hastings, induce us worthily to countenance him, with our especiall grace and favour, in those things which concerne the due preservation and maintenance of his honour. Whereas therefore, the inheritance of Aimar of Valence sometime Earle of Penbroke (as hee was stiled) deceased long since without heire begotten of his body, hath beene devolved unto his sisters, proportionably to be divided among them and their heires: because we know for certaine, that the foresaid Laurence who suc∣ceedeth the said Aimar in part of the inheritance, is descended from the elder sister of Aimar aforesaid, and so by the avouching of the learned with whom wee consulted about this matter, the prerogative both of name and honour is due unto him. We deeme it just and due, that the same Laurence claiming his Title from the elder sister, assume and have the name of Earle of Penbroke, which the said Aimar had whiles he lived. Which verily we, as much as lyeth in us, confirme, ratifie, and also approve unto him: willing and granting, that the said Lau∣rence, have and hold the prerogative and honour of Earle Palatine in those lands which hee holdeth of the said Aimars inheritance, so fully and after the same manner, as the same Aimar had and held them, at the time of his death. In witnesse the King, at Mont-Martin, the thirteenth day of October, and in the thirteenth of our Raigne. After Laurence succeeded his sonne John, who being taken prisoner by the Spa∣niards in a battaile at sea, and in the end ransomed, died in France in the yeere 1375. After him followed his sonne John, who in a running at Tilt at Woodstocke was slaine by Sir Iohn Saint Iohn casually in the yeere 1391. And it was observed that for five generations together in this Family (I know not by what destiny) the father never saw his sonne. Now, for default of his issue, there fell very many possessions and faire revenewes into the Kings hands, Some write that John Duke of Bedford was first for a short time Earle of Penbroke. as our Lawyers use to speake: and the Castle of Penbroke was granted unto Francis At-Court, a Courtier in especiall great favour, who thereupon was commonly called Lord of Pembroke. Not long after, Humfrey sonne to King Henry the Fourth before he was Duke of Glocester, received this title of his brother King Henry the Fifth, and before his death King Henry the Sixth granted the same in reversion (a thing not before heard of) to William de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, after whose downefall, the said King, when hee had enabled Edmund of Hadham, and Iasper of Hatfield, the sonnes of Queene Katharin his mother to bee his lawfull halfe brethren; created Iasper, Earle of Penbroke, and Edmund, Earle of Richmond with preheminence to take place above all Earles. For Kings have absolute authority in dispensing honours. But King Edward the Fourth depriving Iasper of all his honours by attaindour and forfeiture, gave the Title of Pembroke to Sir William Herbert for his good service against Iasper in Wales, but hee shortly after lost his life at the battaile of Banbury. Then succeeded his sonne, bearing the same name, whom King Edward the Fourth when hee had recovered the Kingdome, invested in the Earledome of Huntingdon, and bestowed the Title of Penbroke, being surrendred, upon his eldest sonne and heire Edward Prince of Wales. A long time after King Henry the Eighth invested Anne Bollen (to whom he was affianced) Marchionesse of Pembroke with a mantle and Coronet in regard both of her Nobility, and also her vertues (for so runne the words of the Patent). At length king Edward the Sixth adorned Sir William Herbert Lord of Caerdiffe with the Title of Earle of Penbroke: after whom succeeded his sonne Henry who was Lord Presi∣dent of Wales under Queene Elizabeth. And now his sonne William richly accompli∣shed with all laudable endowments of body and minde enjoyeth the same Title. This Family of the Herberts in these parts of Wales is honourable, and of great anti∣quity. As lineally propagated from Henry Fitz Herbert Chamberlaine to king Hen∣ry the First, who married the said kings Paramor, the mother of Reginald Earle of Cornwall, as I was first enformed by Robert Glover a man passing skilfull in the study of Genealogies, by whose untimely death that knowledge hath sustained a great losse. There are in this Shire Parishes 145. CARDIGAN-SHIRE. F Rom Saint Davids Promontory the shore being driven backe a∣slope Eastward, letteth in the Sea within a vast and crooked Bay, upon which lyeth the third Region of the Dimetae, in English called CARDIGAN-SHIRE, Cardigan-shire. in British Sire Aber-Tivi, by old Latine Writers Ceretica (if any man thinke) of King Caratacus, this may seeme a conjecture proceeding out of his owne braine, and not grounded upon any certaine au∣thority; and yet wee reade that the worthy Caratacus, King Carata∣cus. so worthily renowned, was the Soveraigne Ruler in these parts. A plaine and champion Country it is Westward, where it lyeth to the Sea, as also on the South side, where the River Tivie separateth it from Caermarden-shire: But in the East and North sides, which bound upon Brechnock and Montgomery-shires: there is a continued range, or ridge of hils that shoot along, yeelding goodly pasture ground, under which there be spread sundry large Pooles. That in ancient times this Shire, as the rest also of Wales, was not planted and garnished with Cities but with little cottages, it may bee gathered by that speech of their Prince Caratacus, who being taken Prisoner, when he had throughly viewed the glorious magnificence of Rome, Zonaras. What meane you (saith he) when yee have these and such like stately buildings of your owne, to covet our small cottages? Howbeit the places heere of most Antiquity let us breifly view over. The River Tivie, Tuerobius river. which Ptolomee calleth TUEROBIUS, but corruptly, in stead of Dwr-Tivius, that is, The River Tivie, issueth out of the Poole Lin-Tivy, beneath the hils: whereof I spake before: first cumbred, as it were, with stones in the way, and rumbling with a great noise without any chanell, and so passeth through a very stony tract (neere unto which at Rosse, Rosse. Strat-fleur. the Mountainers keepe the greatest Faire for cattaile in all those parts) untill it come to Strat-fleur, a Monastery long since of the Cluniack Monkes, compassed about with hilles. From thence, being received within a chanell, it runneth downe by Tregaron, and Lhan-Devi-brevi, built and so named in memori∣all of David Bishop of Menevia, where he in a frequent Synode refuted the Pelagian Heresie springing up againe in Britaine, both by the holy Scriptures and also by a miracle, while the earth whereon he stood as he preached, arose up under his feete, by report, to an hillocke. Thus farre and somewhat farther also Tivie holdeth on his course Southward to Lan-Beder a little Mercate Towne. From hence Tivie turning his streame Westward carryeth a broader chanell, Kilgarran. The Salmons leap. and neere unto Kilgarran falleth downe right headlong (as it were) from aloft, and maketh that Salmons Leape, whereof I spake ere while. For, exceeding great store of Salmons it yeeldeth, and was in times past the onely British River, as Giraldus Cambrensis was of opinion, that had Bevers in it. Castore Bevers. This Beaver is a creature living both on land and water, footed before like a Dog and behinde like a Goose, with an ash-coloured skin somewhat blackish, having a long taile, broad and griftly, which in his floting he useth in lieu of a sterne. Concerning the subtile wilinesse of which creatures, the said Giraldus hath observed many things, but at this day none of them are heere to be seene. Scarce two miles from hence standeth upon a steepe banke Cardigan, Cardigan. which the Britans name Aber-Tivy, that is, Tivy-mouth, the Shire-towne, strongly fortified by Gilbert the sonne of Richard De Clare, which afterwards being by treason yeelded up, Rhise Ap Gruffin rased; Fitz-Stephen. when hee had taken prisoner Robert Fitz-Stephen, whom some call Stephanides: who (after hee had stood a long time at the devotion of the Welshmen, his heavie friends for his life, being at length delivered on this condi∣tion, that hee should resigne up into their hands all his possessions in Wales) was the first of the Norman race that with a small power of men, fortunately set foote in Ireland, and by his valour made way for the English to follow, and second him for subduing Ireland under the Crowne of England. From Tivie mouth, the shore gently giveth backe, and openeth for it selfe the pas∣sage of many Riverets; The River S ccia. among which in the upper part of the Shire, STUCCIA, whereof Ptolomee maketh mention, is most memorable, when as the name of it con∣tinueth after a sort, Y-stwith. whole at this day, being called in common speech, Ystwith: at the head whereof are veines of Lead, and at the mouth the Towne Aber-y-stwith, the most populous and plenteous place of the whole Shire, which that noble Gilbert de Clare also fensed with walles, and Walter Bec an Englishman defended a great while a∣gainst the Welsh right manfully. Hard hereunto lyeth Lhan Badern vaur, that is, The Church of Patern the great, who being borne in little Britaine, as wee reade in his life, both governed the Church by feeding, and fed it by governing. Unto whose memory the posterity consecrated heere as well a Church, as also an Episcopall See. But the Bi∣shopricke, as Roger Hoveden writeth, quite decayed many yeeres since when the people had wickedly slaine their Pastour. The river Ridol. At the same mouth also the River Ridol dischargeth it selfe into the Irish sea. This River, descending out of Plinlimon, an exceeding steepe and high hill, that encloseth the North part of the Shire, and powreth out of his lap those most noble Rivers Se∣vern and Wy, whereof I have already often spoken. And not much above Y-stwith mouth, the River Devi that serveth in stead of a limite betweene this and Merionith-shire, is lodged also within the Sea. Scarce had the Normans setled their Kingdome in Britaine, when they assailed this Coast with a Fleet by Sea, and that verily with good successe. For, by little, and little, in the Raigne of King William Rufus, they wrested the maritime Coasts out of the Welshmens hands: but the greatest part thereof they granted unto Cadugan Ap Blethin, Lords of Car∣digan-shire. a right wise and prudent Britain: who was highly esteemed, and of great power throughout all Wales, and evermore shewed much favour and friendship to the English. But when his sonne Oën, a furious and heady young man, who could at no hand away with peace, infested the Englishmen and Flemings newly come thither with continuall invations, the unhappy father was fined with the losse of his lands, and punished for the offenses of his sonne, who was himselfe also constrei∣ned to relinquish his native Country and to flie into Ireland. Then this Cardigan-shire was given by King Henry the First unto Gilbert de Clare, who placed Garisons and fortified Castles there. But Cadugan with his sonne Oën, received into favour a∣gaine by the English, recovered also his owne lands and inheritance. But Oën retur∣ning to his old bias and rebelling afresh, was slaine by Girald the Castellan of Pen∣broke, whose wife Nesta he had carryed away and ravished. And his father being had away into England, long expected for a change of better fortune, and at length in his old age being restored to his owne home and friends, was upon the sodaine by Madoc his Nephew stabbed through the body. After this, Roger de Clare through the liberality of King Henry the Second had Cardigan-shire bestowed upon him: but when Richard of Clare, his Nephew, if I be not deceived, whiles he came hither by land was slaine by the Welsh, Rhise Prince of South-Wales, having made a great massacre of English and driven them out, at length with his victorious Army be∣came Lord thereof: neverthelesse it fell againe by little and little into the hands of the English without any bloudshed. There are in this Shire Parishes 64. ORDEVICES. T Hese Countries of the Silures and Dimetae, which wee have hitherto travailed over, the Posterity, when Wales was subject to three Princes, called in their tongue De∣heu-barth, that is, The part lying on the right hand: and Englishmen, South-Wales, as ath beene said be∣fore. The other two Principalities, which they tearme Guineth and Powis, wee North-Wales and Powisland, were inhabited in ancient times by the ORDOVICES, Ordovices. who also bee named ORDEVI∣CES, ORDOVICAE, and in some places although most corruptly, Or∣dolucae. A puissant and courageous Nation, by reason they keepe wholly in a mountainous Country, and take heart even of the Soile; and which conti∣nued the longest free from the yoake both of Romanes and also of English do∣minion: neither was it subdued by the Romanes, before the daies of the Empe∣rour Domitiane: (For, then Iulius Agricola conquered almost the whole Nation) nor brought under the English before the dayes of King Edward the First. For a long time they lived in a lawlesse kinde of liberty, as bearing themselves bold both upon their owne valour, and the strength of the Country, hard to be wonne: and which may seeme after a sort naturally accommodated for ambushments, and to prolong warres. To lay out and limite the bounds of the ORDEVICES in a generality, is not so hard a matter; but to set downe the true etymologie and reason of their name, I thinke it very difficult. Yet have I conceived this coniecture, that seeing they were seated over the two Rivers Devi, that arising from two springs neere together, take their course divers waies; and considering that Oar-Devi in their British tongue signifieth Vpon, or, above Devi, they were thence named Ordevices : like as the Aruerni had that name, because they dwelt upon the river Garumna, the Armorici their name, for that they inhabited upon the Sea-side, and the Horesci theirs, because their inhabitation was upon the river Eske. Neither is the very name of Ordevices quite vanished without any remaines thereof, in this Tract: For, a great part of it which lyeth to the Sea-side, is yet by the inhabitants usually called Ardudwy, whereof it may seeme the Romanes have made these tearmes Ordovic and Ordevices carrying a softer and gentler sound. But, the whole Countrey (excepting one small Shire) is called of the Latine Writers by one name of a later stampe, Veneti. Guineth. Guinethia, and Venedotia, and of the Britans Guineth, and the same, from the Vannes. Veneti of Armorica as some thinke, who, as Caesar writeth, Were wont very oft to saile unto Britaine. But if I might bee allowed to change one onely letter, I would suppose, that this name was knowne to the Greekes, and to Pausanias, who in his Arcadica recordeth, that Anto∣ninus Pius the Emperour grievously punished the Brigantes, for that they had made inrodes into GENOUNIA a Province of the Romans in Britaine. Genounia. Certes, if it might bee lawfull to reade Genouthia, for Genounia, so neere in sound cōmeth that word to Guinethia, and this Guinethia bordereth so neer to the Brigantes, that unlesse Pausanias ment this region, let Sibylla her selfe declare where it was, and what it should be. But these Countries belonged to the old ORDOVICES which are now called in English by new names, Montgomery-shire, Merioneth-shire, Caernarvon-shire, Denbigh-shire, and Flint-shire. MONGOMERY Comitatus qui olim pars ORDOVICVM. MONTGOMERY-SHIRE. M ONTGOMERY-SHIRE, in British Sire Tre-Faldwin, so called of the principall Towne therein, bounded on the South-side with Cardigan and Radnor-shires, on the East with Shropp-shire, on the North with Denbigh-shire, and on the West with Merionith: although it hath many an high Hill in it, yet by reason of plentifull Valleies, it is a good Coun∣try as well for Corne as Pasture: and in old time a fruitefull breeder of the best kinde of Horses, which, as Giraldus saith, by natures workemanship pourtraying, as it were, in a picture their noble shapes, were very commendable as well for the Membrosa sua majestate. Majesty of their making and bigge limmes, as for their in∣comparable swiftnesse. In the utmost corner of this Shire Westward, where it en∣deth pointwise in manner of a Cone or Pine apple, standeth Machleneth, haply that which the Romanes called MAGLONA: where under the Generall of Britaine in the time of the Emperour Theodosius the younger lay in Garison the Captaine of the Regiment of the Solenses, for to represse and keepe under the Mountainers: and two miles from hence neere unto Penall, there is a place to bee seene, named Keven Caer, that is, The backe or ridge of a Citie, where peeces of Romane Coine are other whiles digged up, and a circular forme of Walles of no small circuit, are apparently seene by the remaines. Five miles hence, the Hill Plinlimon whereof I spake, raiseth it selfe up to a won∣derfull height, The head of Severn. and on that part where it boundeth one side of this shire, it powreth forth SABRINA, the greatest River in Britaine next to Thamis, which the Bri∣tans tearme Haffren, Severn. and Englishmen Severn. Whence the name was derived I could never reade. For, that seemeth to smell of a fable, which Geffrey hath devised of the Virgin Sabrina therein drowned, and which a late Poet following his steps hath delivered thus in Verse. —In flumen pracipitatur Abren, Nomen Abren fluvio de virgine, nomen eidem Nomine corrupto, deinde Sabrina datur. Into the streame was Abren headlong cast; The River then taking that Virgins name, Hight Abren, and thereof Sabrin at last, Which tearme in speech corrupt implies the same. This River immediately from his spring head maketh such a number of windings in and out in his course, that a man would thinke many times hee returnes againe to his fountaine: yet for all that hee runneth forward, or rather slowly wandereth through this shire, Shropp-shire, Worcester-shire, and last of all Glocester-shire, infusing a certaine vitall moisture into the soile every where as he passeth, untill at length hee mildely dischargeth himselfe into the Severn Sea. But in this shire it being oversha∣dowed with Woods, after much strugling hee getteth out Northward by Lanidlos, Trenewith, Newtowne. or Newtowne, and Caer-fuse, which, as they say, is both ancient, and en∣joyeth also ancient priviledges; and not farre from his East banke, leaveth behinde him the Castle, and Towne of Montgomery upon the rising of a Rocke, having a pleasant Plaine under it. The Englishmen named the Castle Montgomery, and the Latines Mons Gomericus, of Roger de Montgomery Earle of Shrewesbury ; who winning much land heereabout from the Welsh, built it, as wee finde in Domesday booke. But when his sonne Robert was attainted for Rebellion, King Henry the First gave this Castle, and the honour of Montgomery to Baldwin Bollers in marriage with Sybill of Falais his Niece. According to whose name the Welshmen call the Towne standing a little from the Castle, Tre-Faldwin, that is, Baldwins Towne. From this Baldwin descended Vital Engain who claimed this Honour as right Heire in the time of king Henry the Third. About which time, the said king Henry the Third raised it up againe out of the very ashes: For, the Welsh had slaine the Garison Souldiers and overthrowne it; and so it lay desolate for many yeeres, and Florilegus fableth, That hee, of the situation of the place then first named it Montgomery. Certaine it is, Anno xj. that the said king then granted by his Patent, That the Burrough of Montgomery should be a free Burrough, with other Liberties. Now the Herber s are heere seated, branched out from a brother of Sir William Herbert the first Earle of Penbroke of that name. Corndon hill. Hard by this, Corndon Hill mounteth up to a very great height, in the top where∣of are placed certaine stones in a round circle like a Coronet, whence it taketh that name, in memoriall as it should seeme of some victory. A little higher, Severn gli∣deth downe by Trellin, that is, The Towne by a Poole, whereupon it is called Welch Poole in English. Welch Poole. It hath a Castle joyning unto it on the South side, called Castle Coch of a kinde of reddish stone wherewith it is built, Red Castle. which within the compasse of one wall, containeth two Castles: the one belonged to the Lord of Powis, the other to the Baron Dudley. Cadugane the sonne of Blethin, that renowned Britan, of whom I spake, whiles he was busie about the building of this Castle, was, as we finde in the Epitome of Lancarbanensis, slaine by his nephew Madock. Right over against this Castle on the other side of the River, standeth Buttington, well knowne by reason of the Danes wintering there; out of which, Adhered Earle of the Mercians expelled them in the yeere of Christ 894. as Marianus writeth. Severn being past these pla∣ces, turneth by little and little Eastward, that he may the sooner entertaine the small River Tanet, which being once received into his society, hee goeth on forward to Shropp-shire. That MEDIOLANUM a Towne of the Ordovices, which both Antonine the Em∣perour, and Ptolomee speake of, stood in this Shire, I am in a manner perswaded, up∣on probability. The footings whereof, I have sought after with all diligence, but little or nothing have I found of it; For time consumeth the very carcasses even of Cities. Yet if we may ground any conjecture upon the situation, seeing the Townes which Antonine placeth on either side, be so well knowne, to wit, BONIUM, now Bangor by Dee on the one side, and RUTUNIUM, now Rowton Castle on the other side (for he setteth it twelve Italian miles distant from this, and from the other twenty) The lines of Position, if I may so tearme them, or of the distance rather, doe cut one another crosse betweene Matrafall and Lan-vethlin, Matrafall. which are scarce three miles a∣sunder, and shew as it were demonstratively the site of our Mediolanum. For, this can∣not chuse but bee an infallible way to finde out the situation of a third place, by two others that are knowne, when as there are neither hils interposed, nor any troublous turnings of the wayes. As for this Matrafall, which standeth five miles Westward from Severn, although it bee now but a bare name, was sometime the regall seat of the Princes of Powis (which may bee an argument of the antiquity thereof) and the same much spoken of by Writers, who record, that after the Princes had once forsaken it, Robert De veteri Ponte. Lan-vethlin. Vipont an Englishman built a Castle. But Lan-vethlin, that is, Vethlius Church, being a little Mercate Towne, although it be somewhat farther off from the crosse-meeting of the said lines, yet commeth it farre neerer in resemblance of name to Mediolanum. For, of Methlin, by the propriety of the British tongue, is made Vethlin, like as of Caer-Merden, is come Caer Verden, and of Ar-mon, Arvon. Nei∣ther doth Methlin, more jarre and disagree in sound from Mediolanum, than either Millano in Italie, Le Million in Xantoigne, or Methlen in the Lowcountries, which Cities no man doubteth were all in times past knowne by the name of Mediolanum. Which of these conjectures commeth neerer to the truth, judge you: for me it is enough to give my guesse. If I should say, that either Duke Medus, or Prince Olanus built this Mediolanum of ours, and those Cities of the same name in Gaule, or that whiles they were a building Sus mediatim Lanata, that is, That a Sow halfe fleeced with wooll, was digged up, might I not be thought (thinke you) to catch at Clouds, and fish for Ni∣fles? Yet notwithstanding the Italians write as much of their Mediolanum. But see∣ing that most true it is, that these Cities were built by nations of the same language (and that the Gaules and Britans spake all one language I have prooved already) it is probable enough, that for one, and the same cause they had also one and the same denomination. Howbeit, this our Mediolanum, in nothing so farre as I know, agreeth with that of Italie, unlesse it be, that both of them are seated upon a plaine betweene two riverets: and a learned Italian derived the name of their Mediolanum hence, be∣cause it is a Citie standing in the middest betweene Lanas, that is, little rivers, accor∣ding to his owne interpretation. But this may seeme overmuch of MEDIOLA∣NUM, which I have sought heere, and about Alcester not farre off. This Countie hath adorned no Earle with the name, Earle of Mont∣gomery. title, and Honour thereof untill of late, our Soveraigne King James created Philip Herbert, second Sonne of Henry Earle of Penbroke by Mary Sidney, for the singular love and affectionate fa∣vour toward him, and for the great hope that he conceived of his vertues, both Ba∣ron Herbert of Shurland, and also Earle of Montgomery, upon one and the same day at Greenwich, Princes of Powise. in the yeere 1605. But, the Princes of Powis, descended from the third Sonne of Rotherike the great, held this shire with others in a perpetuall line of suc∣cession (although Roger and Hugh of Montgomery, had encroched upon some part thereof) untill the daies of King Edward the Second. For then Oen ap Gruffin, ap Guenwinwyn, Lords of Po∣wise. the last Lord of Powis of the British bloud (for the name of Prince had long before been worne out of use) left one onely daughter named Hawise, whom Sir Iohn Charleton an English man, the Kings Servitour or Gentleman of the Privy Chamber, Valect married, and in right of his wife, was by King Edward the Second made Lord of Powise ; who (as I have seene in very many places) gaue for his Armes, a Lion Geules Rampant, in a shield, Or, which he recei∣ved from his wifes Progenitours. Of his posterity there were foure males that bare this Honorable title, untill that in Edward, the succession of males had an end: for he, the said Edward, begat of Aeleonor the daughter and one of the heires of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, Iane, Wife to Sir Iohn Grey Knight, and Joice married unto Iohn Lord Tiptoft, Dupli. Norm. 6. Henr. 5. from whom the Barons of Dudley and others derive their de∣scent. The said Sir Iohn Grey, for his martiall prowesse, and by the bountifull fauour of King Henry the Fifth, Earle of Tan∣quervill. received the Earledome of Tanquervill in Normandie, to have unto him and his heires males, by delivering one Bassinet at the Castle of Roan every yeere on Saint Georges day. This John had a sonne named Henrie, Lord of Powis, in whose race the title of Powis with the Honour thereof continued untill Edward Grey died well neere in our time, leaving no issue lawfully begotten. This Shire hath Parishes 47. MERIONITH Comitatus olim pars ORDOVICVM MERIONETH-SHIRE. F From the backeside of Montgomery-shire, MERIONETH-SHIRE, in British Sire-Verioneth, in Latine Mervinia, and as Giraldus calleth it, Terra filiorum Canaeni, that is, Canaens sonnes Land, reacheth to that crooked Bay, I spake of, and to the maine Sea, which on the West side beateth so sore upon it, that it is verily thought to have carryed away by vio∣lence some part thereof. Southward, for certaine miles together it is severed from Cardigan-shire, by the river Dovy ; on the North it boundeth upon Caer-narvon, and Denbigh-shires. As for the in-land part, Mountaines exceeding high. it so riseth with mountaines standing one by another in plumps, that as Giral∣dus saith, it is the roughest and most unpleasant Country to see to, in all Wales. For, it hath in it mountaines of a wonderfull height, yet narrow and passing sharpe at the top in manner of a needle, and those verily not scattering, heere and there one, but standing very thicke to∣gether, and so even in height that Shepheards talking together, or railing one at another on the tops of them if haply they appoint the field to encounter and meet together, they can hardly doe it from morning till night. But let the Reader heerein relie upon Giraldus credit. Great flockes of Sheepe graze all over these mountaines, neither are they in danger of Wolves, who were thought then to have beene ridde quite out of all England and Wales, when King Eadgar imposed upon Ludwall Prince of these Countries to pre∣sent three hundred Wolves yeerely unto him by way of Tribute. Wolves in England de∣stroied. For, when, as Wil∣liam of Malmesbury writeth, he had for three yeeres performed this, at the fourth yeere, he gave over, upon his protestation, that hee could finde no more. Yet long time after this, there remained some still, See Derby-shire and Yorke shire▪ as appeareth for certaine, by irreproveable testimonies of Record. The inhabitants, who for the most part wholly betake themselves to breeding and feeding of cattaile, and live upon white mea es, as butter, cheese, &c. (how ever Strabo mocked our Britans in times past, as unskilfull in making of cheese) are for stature, cleere complexion, goodly feature, and lineaments of body, inferiour to no Nation in Britain: but they have an ill name among their neighbours, for being too forward in the wanton love of women, and that proceeding from their idlenesse. They have but few townes: Mouthwy. Eastward where Dovy runneth, standeth Mouthwy a Commot very well knowne, which fell for a childes part of inheritance to William, alias, Wilcock of Mouthwy, a younger sonne of Gruffeth Ap Gwenwynwin Lord of Powis: and by his sons daughter it came unto Sir Hugh Burgh, and by his sonnes daughters likewise unto the Families of Newport, Leighton, Lingein, and Mitton, of especiall respect in these parts. Dolegethle. Where the iver Avon runneth downe more Westward, there is Dolegethle a little mercat towne, so called of the Vale wherein it is built. Hard by the sea in the lit∣tle territory named Ardudwy, the Castle Arlech, in times past, named Caer Colun stan∣deth advanced upon a very steepe rocke, and looketh downe into the sea from aloft, which being built, as the Inhabitants report, by King Edward the First, tooke name of the situation. For, Arlech in the British tongue signifieth as much, as upon a Stony rocke. Whiles England was disjointed, and lay torne with civill broiles, David Ap Ien∣kin Ap Enion a noble Gentleman of Wales, who tooke part with the house of Lanca∣ster, defended it stoutly against King Edward the Fourth: untill that Sir William Her∣bert Earle of Pembrock making his way with much adoe through the midst of these mountaines of Wales, no lesse passable than the Alpes, assaulted this Castle in such furious thundering manner, that it was yeelded up into his hands. Incredible it is almost what a cumbersome journey hee had of it, and with what difficulty, hee gat through, whiles he was constrained in some places to climbe up the hilles creeping; in others, to come downe tumbling, both he and his company together. Where∣upon, the dwellers thereabout call that way at this day Le Herbert. Herberts way. A little higher, in the very confines of the Shires, two notable armes of the Sea enbosome themselves within the Land, Traith Maur, and Traith Bachan, that is, The greater Wash, and the lesse. Fastineog. And not farre from hence, neere unto a little Village called Fastineog, there is a street or Port-way paved with stone, that passeth through these cumber ome and in manner, unpassable Mountaines. Which considering that the Britans name it Sarn Helen, Helens street. that is, Helens Street, it is not to be thought, but that Helena mother to Constan∣tine the Great, who did many such like famous workes throughout the Romane Empire, laied the same with stone. Neither standeth farre from it Caer-Gai, that is, The Castle of Caius, built by one Caius a Roman, touching whom the common peo∣ple dwelling thereby report great wonders. The Sources of Dee. In the East side of the Shire, the River Dee springeth out of two Fountaines, whence some thinke it tooke the name, for, they call it Dwy, which word importeth also among them the number of two (although others would needs have it so tear∣med of some Divinity, other of the blacke colour) and forthwith passeth entire and whole through Lhintegid, Pimble-meare. in English Pimble-Meare, and Plenlin-Meare ; a Lake sprea∣ding farre in length and breadth: and so runneth out of it with as great a streame as it entred in. For, neither shall a man see in Dee the fishes called Guiniad, which are peculiar to the Meare, Guiniad fishes. nor yet Salmons in the Meare, which neverthelesse are com∣monly taken in the River. But see if you please the description of this Lake or Meare, in verse by the Antiquarian Poet. Hispida quà tellus Mervinia respicit Eurum, Est locus antiquo Penlinum nomine dictus, Hîc lacus illimeis in valle Tegeius alta Latè expandit aquas, & vastum conficit orbem, Excipiens gremio latices, qui fonte perenni Vicinis recidunt de montibus, atque sonoris Illecebris captas demulcent suaviter aures: Illud habet certè lacus admirabile dictu, Quantumvis magna pluvia non astuat: atqui Aëre turbato, si ventus murmura tollat, Excrescit subito rapidis violentior undis, Et tumido superat contempias flumine ripas. On th' East side of Merioneth, a Country rough that is, A place there lies by ancient name cleped Penlin, ywis, Whereas, within a Valley deepe, there spreadeth farre a Lake With waters cleere without all mud, which compasse huge doth take. Receiving sundry pirles to it and many a running rill, That spring and fall continually from every neighbour hill. And with shrill noise and pleasant sounds allured eares doe fill. And verily a wonder't is, of this Lake strange to tell, Although the raine powre downe amaine, the waters never swell. But if the aire much troubled be, and windes aloft doe blow, It swelles at once, no streame so much, and bankes doth overflow. Bala. On the browe, or edge heereof standeth Bala a little Towne, endowed with ma∣ny immunities, but peopled with few inhabitants, and as rudely and unhandsome∣ly built, neverthelesse it is the chiefe Mercate Towne for these Mountainers. Hugh Earle of Chester was the first of the Normans that tooke this Country, and held it with planting Garisons, what time as he kept Gruffin Ap Conan, that is, the sonne of Conan prisoner: But Gruffin afterwards recovered it with the rest of his Principality, and left it unto his heires, untill it came unto the fatall Periode, and so ended in Lhewellin. It reckoneth Churches 37. CAERNARVŌ Comitatus pars olim ORDOVICVM CAERNARVON-SHIRE. A Bove Merionith-shire, lieth that Country which the Britans call Sire Caer-ar-von, and English men CAER-NARVON-SHIRE, of the principall Towne therein; and before that Wales was laied out into Shires, they tearmed it, by the name of Snowden-Forest, and the Latine Historians Snaudonia, of that Forest, and Ar-vonia, out of the British name because it hath Mona, that is, Anglesey just over against it. The North side and the West butteth upon the Irish Sea: the South-side is enclosed with Merioneth-shire, Conway Ri and the East with Denbigh-shire, from which it is se∣vered by the River Conwy. On that part which looketh toward the Sea, especially where it shooteth forth a great way South-west with a Promontorie and stretcheth out the shores with crooked turning full against OCTOPITARUM, or Saint Davids Land, it is of a very fruitfull soile and garnished all a long with prety Townes. As for the more in-land part of the Shire, Nature hath loftily areared it up farre and neere with Mountaines standing thicke one by another, as if she would here have compacted the joynts of this Island within the bowels of the earth: and made this part thereof a most sure place of refuge for the Britans in time of adversitie. For there are so many roughes and Rocks, so many vales full of Woods, with Pooles heere and there crossing over them, lying in the way betweene, that no Armie, nay not so much as those that are lightly appoynted, can finde passage. A man may truely, The Alpes Britany. if he please, terme these Mountaines, the British Alpes: for besides that they are the greatest of the whole Island, they are no lesse steepe also with crag∣ged and rent Rockes on every side than the Alpes of Italie, yea and all of them com∣passe one Mountaine round about, which over-topping the rest so towreth up with his head aloft in the aire, as he may seeme not to threaten the Skie, but to thrust his head up into Heaven. And yet harbour they the Snow, for, all the yeere long, they be hory with Snow, or rather with an hardened crust of many Snowes felted together. Whence it is, that all these hilles are in British by one name termed Craig Eriry, in English Snow-don, Snow-don hilles. which in both languages, sound as much as Snowie Moun∣taines: like as Niphates in Armenia, and Imaus in Scythia, tooke their names, as Pli∣nie witnesseth of Snow. Neverthelesse, so ranke are they with grasse, that it is a very common speech among the Welsh, That the Mountaines Eriry will yeeld suffici∣ent pasture for all the Cattaile in Wales, if they were put upon them together. Concerning the two Meares on the toppe of these, in the one of which floreth a wandring Island, and in the other is found great store of Fishes, but having all of them but one eye a peece, I will say nothing left I might seeme to foster fables: although some confi∣dent upon the authoritie of Giraldus, have beleeved it for a veritie. Yet certaine it is, that there be in the very toppe of these Mountaines Pooles in deed and standing Waters: whereupon Gervase of Tilbury in his Booke entituled Otia Imperialia, wri∣teth thus. In the Land of Wales within the bounds of great Britain, there be high Hilles that haue laied their foundations upon most hard Rockes, and in the toppe thereof the earth is crusted over with such a coate of waterish moisture, that wheresoever a man doe but lightly set his foote, he shall perceive the ground to stirre the length of a stones cast from him: whereupon when the enemies came, the Welsh with their agility and nimblenesse lightly leaping over the boggy ground, either avoide the enemies assaults, or to their losse resolutely expect their forces. These Mountainers John Salisbury in his Polycraticon, by a new forged Latine name termed Nivicollinos, Nivicollini. that is, Snow-down inhabitants, of whom in King Henry the Second his daies he wrote thus. The Snow-downe Britans make inrodes, and being now come out of their Caves and lur∣king holes of the Woods, enlarge their borders, possesse the plaines of the Noble men: and whiles themselves looke on, they assault, they winne, and overthrow them, or else keepe the same to their owne behoofe; because our youth, which is so daintily brought up, and loves to be house-birds and to live lazie, in the shade, being borne onely to devoure the fruits of the earth and to fill the belly, sleepes untill it be broad day light, &c. But come wee downe now from the Mountaines into the Champion Plaines, which because we finde no where else but by the Sea side, it may suffice to coast only along the shore. The Promontory which I said before shooteth out toward the South-west, Canganum. is in Ptolomee called according to the diversitie of copies, CANGA∣NUM, JANGANUM, and LANGANUM. Which is the truest name I know not, but LANGANUM it may seeme; considering that the inhabitants name it at this day Lhein, Lhein. which runneth forth with a narrow and even by-land, having larger and more open fields than the rest of the Country, and the same yeelding Barley most plenteously. Two little Townes it sheweth and no more, that are memorable. Far∣ther within upon the Creeke, Pulhely. Nevin. is Pullhely, that is, that Salt Meare or Poole: more out∣ward, by the Irish Sea (hat beateth upon the other side of the Bi-land) is Nevin, a Village having a Merket kept in it: wherein the Nobility of England, in the yeere of our Lord 1284. in a Triumph over the Welsh did celebrate the memory of Arthur the great, as Florilegus writeth, with Iustes, Turnaments and festivall pompe. If any other Townes flourished here, then were they destroied, when Hugh Earle of Chester, The life of Gruffin. Robert of Rudland, and Guarin of Salop, entring into this Country first of all the Normans, so wasted this Promontory, that for the space of seven whole yeeres, it lay dispeopled and desolate. From Nevin, the shore pointed and endented with one or two elbowes lying out into the sea tendeth Northward, and then turning afront North-east, by a narrow sea or Frith (they call it Menai ) it serveth the Isle Anglesey from the firme land. Menai. Upon this straight or narrow sea stood SEGONTIUM, Segontium. a City which Antonine the Emperour maketh mention of: some reliques of the walles I saw neere unto a little Church built in honour of Saint Pulblicius. Lhan Beblin. It tooke the name of a River running by the side of it, which yet at this day is called Seiont, and issueth out of the Poole Lin-Peru. In which, there is a kinde of fish peculiar to that water, and seene no where else, called by the dwellers there Tor-coch ; Tor-coch fishes. of the belly that is somewhat red. Now, seeing that in an ancient copie of Ptolomee, SETANTIORUM PORTUS is here placed, which according to other copies is set farther off, if I should reade in stead of it, SEGON∣TIORUM PORTUS, that is, the Haven of the Segontians, and say it stood upon the mouth of this River, I should perhaps aime at the truth: if not, yet should I obtaine pardon for my conjecture of a courteous Reader. This Citie Ninnius called Caer Custenith ; and hee that wrote the life of Gruffin the Sonne of Conan, recordeth, that Hugh Earle of Chester built a Castle in Hean Caer Custenith, that is, as the Latine Interpreter transl teth it, in the auncient Citie of Con∣stantine the Emperour. And Matthew of Westminster writeth (but let him make it good if he can) that the bodie of Constantius, Father to Constantine the Great was here found in the yeere of our Lord 1283. and honourably bestowed in the Church of the new Citie by the commandement of King Edward the First. Who out of the ruines of this Towne, at the same time raised the Citie Caer-narvon somewhat higher, upon the Rivers mouth, so, as that on the West and North-sides it is watered therewith. Which, Caer-narvon. as it was called Caer-narvon because it standeth right ouer against the Island Mona (for so much doth the word import) so, it hath communicated that name unto the whole Country; for, heereupon the English men call it Caer-nar∣von-shire. This is encompassed with a very small circuit of walles about it and in manner round, but the same exceeding strong, and to set it the better out, sheweth a passing faire Castle which taketh up the whole West side of it. The private buil∣dings (for the manner of that Countrey) are sightly enough, and the inhabitants for their courtesie much commended, who thinke it a point of their glorie, that King Edward the First, founded their Citie; that his Sonne King Edward the Se∣cond was heere borne and surnamed of Caer-narvon ; who also was of the English line the first Prince of Wales ; and also the Princes of Wales had heere their Chauncerie, their Exchequer, and their Iustice for North-Wales. About seven miles hence by the same narrow Sea standeth Bangor or Banchor low seated, Banchor as or would say Pe chor, that is, principal Qui as others thin enclosed on the South side with a Mountaine of great heighth, on the North with a little hill: so called A choro pulchro, that is, of a faire quire, or as some would have it, quasi Locus Chori, that is, as if it were the place of a quire. Which being a Bishops See, hath within the Diocese there∣of 96. Parishes. The Church, was consecrated unto Daniel sometime Bishop there∣of: but that which now standeth is of no especiall faire building: for, Owen Glen∣doverdwy that most notorious Rebell, who had purposed utterly to destroy all the Cities of Wales, set it on fire, for that they stood for the King of England, and de∣faced the ancient Church, which albeit Henry Deney Bishop of the same repaired about the time of King Henry the Seventh, yet it scarcely recovered the former dig∣nity. Now the Towne is small, The life of Gruffin. but in times past so large, that for the greatnesse thereof it was called Banchor Vaur, that is, Great Banchor, and Hugh Earle of Chester fortified it with a Castle, whereof I could finde no footings at all, though I sought them with all diligent inquiry: But that Castle was situate upon the very entry of the said narrow Sea. Over the Menay, or streight hereby, King Edward the First, that he might transport his Army into Mona, or Anglesey (whereof I must treat anon in due order) went about with great labour to make a bridge, but all in vaine. Albeit Suctonius Paulinus conveyed over his Romane Souldiers long before into Mona, his Horsemen at a Fourd, and the Footemen in little flat botomed boates, as we reade in Tacitus. From hence the shore raising it selfe with a bending ascent, runneth on by Penmaen-maur, Pen-maen-maur. that is, The great stony head, a very exceeding high and steepe Rocke, which hanging over the Sea when it is floud, affourdeth a very narrow path way for passengers, having on the one side huge stones over their heads, as if they were ready to fall upon them, on the other side the raging Ocean lying of a wonderfull steepe depth under it. But after a man hath passed over this, together with Pen-maen bychan, that is, the lesser stony head, he shall come to an open broad plaine, that reacheth as farre as to the River Conwey, Conwey Rive which limiteth this Shire on the East side. This River in Ptolomee after a corrupt manner of writing Greeke, is called TOISOVIUS, for CO∣NOVIUS. It issueth out of a Poole of the same name in the South border of the Shire, and being pent in, and, as it were, strangled runneth apace within a very nar∣row chanell, as farre almost as to the mouth thereof, breeding certaine Shell-fishes, which being conceived of an Heavenly deaw, Pearles. Conwey Towne. bring forth Pearles; and there, gi∣veth he name unto the Towne CONOVIUM which Antonine mentioneth. And although it now lie all along, and that name there be utterly extinct, yet by a new name it doth covertly implie the antiquity. For a very small and poore village stan∣ding among the rubbish thereof is called Caer hean, that is, the ancient City. Out of the spoile and ruines whereof, King Edward the First built a new Towne at the very mouth of the River, which thereupon they call Aber-Conwey, that is, the mouth of Con∣wey ; which place Hugh of Chester had before-time fortified. But this New Conovium, or Aber-Conwey, being strongly situated and fensed both with walls, and also with a very proper Castle by the Rivers side, deserveth the name rather of a prety Citie than of a Towne, but that it is not replenished with Inhabitants. Opposite unto this Towne, and yet on this side of the River which is passed by fer∣ry, and not by bridge, reacheth out a huge Promontory with a bending elbow as if nature purposed to make there a road and harbour for Ships) which is also counted part of this Shire, Gogarth. and is named Gogarth: wherein stood Diganwy, an ancient City just over the River Conwey, where it issueth into the Sea: which was burnt many yeeres agoe with lightning. Dictum. And I am of opinion, that it was the City DICTUM; where, under the later Emperours the Captaine over the band of the Nervians Dictenses kept their guard. Diganwy. Ganoc. And for that, afterwards it was called Diganwy, who seeth not that the said Canwey came of Conwey, and from thence the English name Ganoc? For, so was that Castle called, which afterwards King Henry the Third built in that place to bridle the Welsh. Straight after the Normans comming into this Island, Gruffin ap Conan, gover∣ned this Country, who being not able to represse the English troupes who swarmed into Wales, yeelded otherwhiles unto the tempest: and at length when with his in∣tegrity and uprightnesse he had regained the favour of King Henry the First, he ea∣sily also recovered his owne lands of the English, and left them to his heires succes∣sively, untill the time of Lhewelyn ap Gruffith, who when he had provoked his owne Brethren with wrongs, and the English men with inrodes, was brought to this passe, that hee held this hilly Country together with the Isle Anglesey of King Edward the First as Tenant in Fee, and paid for it yeerely a thousand Markes. Which con∣ditions afterward when hee would not stand unto, and following rather his owne and his Brothers stubborne wilfulnesse, than any good hope to prevaile, would needes put all once againe to the hazard of warre, he was slaine, and so both ended his owne life and withall the British government in Wales. It hath in it Parish Churches 68. ANGLESEY Conitatus, olim MONA INSULA Druidum sedes, Britannice Tir Mon THE ISLE MONA, or of ANGLESEY. T He County of Caer-Nar-von, which I last ranne through, tooke name as I said erewhile, of the chiefe Towne therein: and the said Towne, of the Isle Mona which lieth over a∣gainst it: and requireth, as it were of right, that I should treat of it in his due place, which unwillingly heeretofore (I confesse) I referred to the out Islands: whereas by right, it is to be placed among the Shires. This Isle called of the Romans MONA, Mona. Anglesey. of the Britans Mon, and Tir-Mon, that is, the land of Mon and Ynis Dowil, that is, A shadowy or darke Island, of the ancient Anglo-Saxons , and at last, after that the English men became Lords of it -ea, and , as one would say, The English mens Island, being severed from the Continent of Britaine with the small narrow streight of Menai, and on all parts besides beaten upon with that surging and troublous Irish Sea, lieth in forme une∣quall; in length from East to West reaching out twenty miles, in breadth scarce se∣venteene. And albeit, as Giraldus saith, the ground may seeme dry and stonie, nothing sightly and unpleasant, and for the outward qualitie resembleth wholy the land Pebidia c, that lieth hard unto Saint Davids: yet for the inward gift of nature, it is farre unlike. For, above all the Coasts of Wales it is without comparison most plentifull of Wheat, in so much as by way of a Proverbe they are wont to say of it in the Welsh language, Mon Mam Cymbry, which is as much in English, As Mon is the mother of Wales: because when all other Coun∣tries round about doe faile, this alone with the exceeding fat soile, and plentifull encrease of Corne was wont to sustaine all Wales. In Cattaile also it is passing rich, and sendeth out great multitudes. It yeeldeth also Grind stones, and in some place an earth standing upon Alum; out of which some not long since beganne to make Alum and Cope∣rose. But when they saw it not answerable to their expectation at first, without any farther hope they gave over their enterprise. This is that most notable Isle MONA, Druid . the ancient seat of the Druides, attempted first by Paulinus Suetonius, and brought under the Romane Empire by Iulius Agri∣cola. This Suetonius Paulinus under the reigne of Nero, as Tacitus writeth, made all preparation to invade the Isle Mona inhabited by a strong and stout Nation, and then the re∣ceptacle of Fugitives. He built Flat-bothom vessels, because the Sea is shalow, the landing-shore uncertaine. Thus their footmen passed over, and after them the Horsemen following by the shallow fourd, or swimming where the waters were deepe with their Horses. Against them stood the Enemies armies on the shore thicke set in aray, well appoynted with Men and weapons, and Women also running in, to and fro among them, like furies of Hell, in mourning attyre, their hayre about their eares, and with firebrands in their hands. Round about them also were the Druida, who lifting up their hands to Heaven, and powring out deadly curses, with the strangenesse of the sight, so daunted the Souldiers, as they stood stock-still, and not able to stirre their joynts presented their bodies unto wounds. At length, what with the exhortation of their Captaine, and what with encouraging and animating one another not to feare a flocke of Franticke Women, and fanaticall persons, they displaied and advaunced forward their En∣signes: Downe they goe with all in their way, and thrust them within their owne fires. Which done, Garisons were placed in their Townes, and the Groves consecrated to their cruell Supersti∣tions cut downe: For they accounted it lawfull to Sacrifice with the bloud of Captives, and by inspection of Mens fibres and bowels to know the will of their gods. But as Paulinus was busie in these exploits, newes came unto him of a sudden revolt through the whole Province, which stayed his enterprise. Afterwards, as the same Tacitus writeth, Iulius Agricola, purpo∣sed with himselfe to subdue the Island Mona, from the possession whereof, as I said before Pauli∣nus was revoked by a generall rebellion of all Britaine: But (as in a purpose not prepensed before) vessels being wanting, the policie and resolutenesse of the Captaine devised a passage over, causing the most choise of the Auxiliaries, to whom all the shallowes were knowne, and who after the use of their Country were able in Swimming to governe themselves with their Armour and Horses; laying aside their carriage, to put over at once and suddenly to in∣vade them. Which thing so amazed the Enemies who supposed they would passe over by Ship∣ping and therefore attended for a Fleet, and the tide, that they beleeved verily nothing could be hard or invincible to men that came so resolute to Warre. Whereupon they humbly intreated for Peace and yeelded the Island. Thus by this service Agricola became famous indeed, and of great reputation. Many ages after, it was Conquered by the English men, and tooke their name, as being called in old time in the Saxons language , now commonly Anglesey, as one would say, The English mens Island. But seeing that Humfrey Lhuid in a very learned Epistle to that learned Ortelius, hath restored this Island to the due name and dignitie, there is no reason that any man heere should require my diligence. Yet thus much will I adde unto the rest. When the Empire of the Romanes in Britaine now was in declining and going downward, some out of Ireland, entred in by stealth into this Isle also and nestled there. For, besides certaine Mounts of earth entren∣ched about, which they call The Irish mens cotages, there is a place also, named Yn He∣ricy Gwidil of the Irish men, who as we finde it recorded in the booke of Triades, un∣der the leading of Sirigus, put the Britans to flight in that place. Neither was it grievously infested onely by the English men, but also by the Nor∣vegians. Likewise in the yeere of our redemption 1000. King Aethelreds fleete ha∣ving skoured the Seas round about the said Isle, wasted it in all hostile maner. After this, the two Norman Hughes, the one Earle of Chester, and the other Earle of Shrewsburie greatly afflicted it, and built Castle Aber-Llienioc for to restraine and keepe under the Inhabitants. But Magnus the Norwegian arriving heere at the very same time, shot the said Hugh Earle of Shrewsbury through with an Arrow, and after he had ransacked the Island, departed. The English men moreover after∣ward from time to time invaded it, untill that King Edward the First brought it wholly under his subjection. There were in ancient time reckoned in it 363. Villa∣ges, and even at this day it is well peopled. The principall Towne therein at this time is Beaumarish, which King Edward the First built in the East-side of the Isle vpon a marish ground, and for the situation thereof gave it this goodly faire name, where∣as before time it was called Bonover, who also fortified it with a Castle, which not∣withstanding may seeme never to have been finished: the Governour whereof is the right Worshipfull Sir Richard Bulkley Knight, whose courtesie toward me when I came to visite these places, I cannot chuse but evermore acknowledge with most hearty thankfulnesse. Lhan-vays. Hard unto Beau-Marish, lieth Lhan-vays, a famous religious house in times past of the Friers Minors, unto whom the Kings of England shewed themselves very bountifull Patrons, as well in regard of the Friers holinesse, who there conversed, as also because there (that I may speake out of the publike records of the Kingdome) were buried a daughter of King Iohn, 2. Pars Pat. anno 2. H. 5. a sonne of the King of the Danes, the bodies also of the Lord Clifford, and of other Lords, Knights, and Squires, who in the time of the noble and renowned Kings of England, were slaine in the Warres against the Welsh. Newburg. The next Towne in name to Beau-Marish, is Newburg called in British Rossur standing ten miles off Westward, which having been a long time greatly annoyed with heaps of sand driven in by the Sea, complaineth that it hath lost much of the former state that it had. Aber-fraw. Aber-fraw is not farre from hence, which is now but an obscure and meane Towne, yet in times past it excelled all the rest farre in worth and dignity, as having been the Royall seat of the Kings of Guineth, or North-Wales. And in the utmost Promontorie Westward, Holy head. which wee call Holy-head, there standeth a little poore Towne, Saint Kibie. As touching the Islands a joyning to A glesey, See a∣mong the Bri∣tish Isles. in British Caer-Guby so named of Kibie a right holy man, and a disciple of Saint Hilarie of Poitiers, who therein devoted himselfe to the service of God, and from whence there is an usuall passage over into Ireland. All the rest of this Island is well bespred with Villages, which because they have in them nothing materially memorable, I will crosse over into the Continent, and view Denbigh-shire. In this County there are reckoned Parishes 74. DENBIGH Comitatus pars Olim ORDOVICVM DENBIGH-SHIRE. O N this side of the River Conwey, DENBIGH-SHIRE, in Welsh Sire Denbigh, retyreth more within the Country from the Sea, and shooteth Eastward in one place as farre as to the River Dee. On the North North-West, first the Sea for a small space, and then Flint-shire, on the West Merionith and Montgomery-shires, on the East Cheshire, and Shropp-shire en∣compasse it. The West part is barraine, the middle where it lyeth flat in a Valley, most fruitfull. The East side when it is once past the Valley, hath not Nature so favourable unto it, but next unto Dee, it findeth her farre more kinde. The West part, but that it is somewhat more plentifull and pleasant toward the sea side, is but heere and there inhabited, and mounteth up more with bare and hun∣gry hils: but yet the painfull diligence and witty industry of the husbandmen hath begunne a good while since to overcome this leannesse of the soile, where the hilles settle any thing flattish, as in other parts of Wales likewise. For, after they have with a broad kinde of spade pared away the upper coat, as it were, or sord of the earth, into certaine turfes, they pile them up artificially on heapes, put fire to them and burne them to ashes, which being throwne upon the ground so pared, and flayed, causeth the hungry barrainnesse thereof so to fructifie, that the fields bring forth a kinde of Rhie or Amel corne in such abundance as it is incredible. Neither is this a new devise thus to burne the ground, but very ancient, as we may see in Virgil and Horace. Among these Hilles there is a place commonly called Cerigy Drudion, that is, The stones of the Druidae, and certaine little columnes or pillars are seene at Yvoellas, with inscriptions in them of strange Characters, which some imagine to have beene erected by the Druides: and not farre from Clocainog, this inscription is read in a stone. AMILLIN TOVISATOC. By the Vale side where these mountaines beginne now to wax thinner, Denbigh. upon the hanging of a rocke standeth Denbigh, called of our Britans by a more ancient name, Cled Fryn-yn Ross, that is, A rough hill in Ross, for so they call that part of the Shire: which King Edward the First gave with other faire lands and possessions to David the brother of Lhewellin. But when he soone after being found guilty of high trea∣son was beheaded, Henry Lacy Earle of Lincolne obtained it by the grant of the said King Edward: and he fortified it with a wall about, not large in circuit, but strong, and on the South side with a proper Castle, strengthned with high Towres. In the well whereof, after that his onely sonne fortuned to be drowned, the most sorrow∣full father conceived such griefe, that he gave over the worke and left it unfinished. And after his death, the Towne with the rest of the possessions descended unto the house of Lancaster by his daughter Alice, who survived: From whom notwithstan∣ding it came first through the liberality of King Edward the Second (when the said house was dejected) unto Hugh Spenser Earle of Winchester ; then, to Roger Morti∣mer by covenant and composition with King Edward the Third: and the said Mortimers Armes are to be seene upon the chiefe gate. But after that he was execu∣ted, it with the Cantreds of Ross, and Riewinoc, &c. were granted to William Monta∣cute after Earle of Salisbury, for supprising of Mortimer, and shortly after it was resto∣red unto the Mortimers, and by them at length descended to the Family of Yorke. At which time, they of the House of Lancaster for the malice they bare unto Edward the Fourth, who was of the family of Yorke, did much hurt unto it. And then, either because the inhabitants like not the steepe situation thereof (for the carriage up and downe was very incommodious) or by reason that it wanted water, they remooved downe from thence by little and little, so as that this ancient Towne hath now few or none dwelling in it: But a new one farre bigger than it sprung up at the very foote, of the hill: which is so well peopled and inhabited, that by reason, that the Church is not able to receive the multitude, they beganne to build a new one in the place where the old Towne stood, partly at the charges of their Lord Robert Earle of Leicester, and partly with the money which they have gathered of many well dispo∣sed throughout England: For, the said Robert, in the yeere 1564. was created by Queene Elizabeth Baron of Deubigh, to him and the heires of his body lawfully be∣gotten. Neither is there any one Barony in all England that hath more Gentlemen holding thereof in fee, and by service. Diffrin Cluid. Now are we come into the very heart of the shire, where Nature having removed the hils out of the way on both sides, to shew what she could doe in a rough country, hath spred beneath them a most beautifull pleasant vale reaching 17. miles in length from South to North, and five miles or thereabout in bredth, which lyeth open on∣ly toward the sea and the cleering North winde: otherwise environed it is on every side with high hilles, and those from the East side, as it were embatled. For such is the wonderfull workmanship of nature, that the tops of these mountaines resemble in fashion the battlement of walles. Among which the highest is Moilenlly, on the top whereof I saw a warlike fense with trench and rampire; also a little fountaine of cleere water. This vale for wholsomenesse, fruitfulnesse and pleasantnesse excel∣leth. The colour and complexion of the Inhabitants is healthy, their heads are sound and of a firme constitution, their eye-sight continuing, and never dimme, and their age long lasting and very cheerefull. The Vale it selfe, with his greene med∣dowes, yellow Corne-fields, Villages, and faire houses standing thicke, and many beautifull Churches, giveth wonderfull great contentment to such as behold it from above. Cluid River. The river Cluid, encreased with beckes and brookes resorting unto it from the hils on each side, doth from the very spring-head part it in twaine running through the midst of it, whence in ancient time it was named Strat Cluid ; For, Marianus ma∣keth mention of a King of the Strat-Clud of the Welsh ; and at this day it is common∣ly called Diffryn Cluid, that is, The Vale of Cluid: wherein, as some have recorded, certaine Britans which came out of Scotland, after they had driven forth the Eng∣lish, erected a petty Kingdome. On the East banke of Cluid, in the South part of the vale, standeth Ruthin, in Latin writers Ruthunia, in British Ruthun, the greatest mercat towne in all the Vale, full of Inhabitants, and well replenished with buildings; fa∣mous also not long since by reason of a large and very faire Castle able to receive and entertaine a great houshold. Which with the Towne, Reginald Grey to whom King Edward the First granted it, and Roger Grey, built, having obtained licence of the King, the Bishop of Saint Asaph, and the Parson of the Church of Lhan-Ruth, in whose Parish the place is sited. Unto him in recompense for his part of the good service performed against the Welsh, King Edward the First had given in manner the whole Vale: and it was the seat of his heires, men of great honour; and at length stiled with the Title of Earle of Kent, untill that Richard Grey Earle of Kent and Lord of Ruthin having no issue nor care of his brother Henry, passed away for a summe of money this his ancient inheritance unto King Henry the Seventh: But of late daies the bounteous magnificence of Queene Elizabeth bestowed it upon Ambrose Dud∣ley Earle of Warwicke, together with rich revenewes in the Vale. When you ascend out of the vale Eastward, you come to Yale, a little hilly country, and in comparison of the Regions beneath and round about it passing high, so that no river from elsewhere commeth into it, and it sendeth forth some from it. By rea∣son of this high situation it is bleake, as exposed to the windes on all sides. Whether it tooke that name of the riveret Alen, which rising first in it, undermineth the ground and once or twice hideth himselfe, I know not. The Mountaines are full of Neat, sheepe, and Goates: the vallies in some plenteous enough of Corne, especially East, on this side of Alen. But the more Westerly part is not so fruitfull, and in some places is a very heath, and altogether barraine. Neither hath it any thing me∣morable, save onely a little Abbay, now wholly decaied, but standing most richly and pleasantly in a Vale, which among the woody hilles cutteth it selfe overthwart in manner of a crosse, Valle Cruel . Vale of the Crosse. whereupon it was called in Latine Vallis Crucis, that is, The Vale of the Crosse, and in British Lhane-Gwest. From hence more Eastward, the Territory called in Welsh Mailor Gymraig, that is, Welsh Mailor, in English Bromfield, reacheth as farre as to the river Dee. A small Territory, Lead. Wrexham but very rich and pleasant, plentifull withall of Lead, especially neere unto Moinglath, a little Towne which tooke the name of Mines. Heere is Wrex∣ham to be seene, in the Saxons tongue. , much spoken of for a passing faire towre Steeple that the Church hath, and the musicall Organs that bee therein. And neere unto it is Leonis Castrum, happily so called of the twenty Legion denomi∣nated Victrix, which a little higher on the other banke of Dee lay garrisoned: now it goeth commonly under the name of Holt: Holt▪ and is thought to have beene re-edified of late by Sir William Stanley, and long since by John Earle of Warren, who being a Guardian of trust unto Madock a Welsh Lord, conveighed falsly from his Ward, this Lordship together with Yale unto himselfe. But from the Earles of Warren, it came unto the Fitz-Alans Earles of Arundell, * and from them to Sir William Beauchamp Ba∣ron of Abergevenney, and afterward to Sir William Stanley Chamberlaine to King Henry the Seventh, who contesting with his Soveraigne about his good services (when hee was honourably recompensed) lost his head, forgetting that Sove∣raignes must not bee beholding to Subjects, howsoever Subjects fancy their owne good services. Beneath Bromfield, Southward lyeth Chirke, in Welsh Gwain, being also very hil∣ly, but well knowne in elder ages for two Castles, Chirkes. Chirke which gave it the name, built by Roger Mortimer, Castle Dinas Bran. and Castle Dinas Bran, situate in the hanging of a mighty high hill pointed in the top: where of note there remaineth nothing but the very ruines. The common sort affirme, that Brennius the Generall of the Galles both built and so named it: others interpret the name to this sense, The Castle of the Kings Palace. For, Bren in British signifieth a King: Bren. Brennus▪ whence perhaps that most puissant King of Gaules and Britans both, was by way of excellency called Brennus: But others againe draw this name from the high situation upon an hill, which the Britans tearme Bren, and in mine opinion this their conjecture carryeth with it more probability. In the time of King Henry the Third, it was the mansion place of Gruffith Ap Madoc, who when he tooke part with the English against the Welsh, was wont heere to make his abode: but after his death, Roger Mortimer who had the charge and tuition of his sonne Lhewellin, like as Iohn Earle of Warren, of whom I spake seized Bromfield ; so hee seized also this Chirck, into his possession. When the State of the Welsh by reason of their owne civill dissensions, and the invasions of English, now ready to ruine, could not well subsist, the Earles of Che∣ster and of Warren, the Mortimers, Lacy, and the Greies, that I spake of, first of all the Normans brought this little Country of Denbigh by little and little into their owne hands and left possession thereof to their heires. Neither was it made a Shire be∣fore King Henry the Eighth his daies: at which time Radnor, Brechnock, and Mont∣gomery, by authority of the Parliament were ordained to be Shires. In this Shire there be Parishes 57, FLINT Comitatus quem ORDOVICES Olim Incosuerunt FLINT-SHIRE. R IGHT over against Denbigh-shire North-East-ward lyeth FLINT-SHIRE, a small Territory, more in length than in breadth: hemmed in on the North side with the Irish Sea, or rather with an Arme of the same: on the East with Che∣shire, on other parts with Denbigh-shire. It is no mountaine Country to speake of, yet rising somewhat with the bearing up of Hilles, and gently falleth and sloopeth it selfe downe with fruitfull fields, which towards Dee an Arme of the Sea, especially every first Yeere that they bee new broken uppe and sowne, beare in some places Barley, in others Wheat, but generally throughout Rye with twenty fold encrease and better, and afterwards foure or five Crops together of Otes. In the Confines of this Shire and Denbigh-shire where the hilles grow more flat and plaine with a softer fall, and an easier descent downe into the Vale, in the very gullet and entry thereof, Varis▪ the Romanes placed a little City named VARIS, which Antonine the Emperour placeth nineteene miles from CONOVIUM. This without any maime of the name is called at this day Bod-Vari, Bod-vari. that is, Mansion Vari, and the next little hill hard by which the inhabitants thereabout commonly call Moyly Ga∣er, that is, The Mountaine of the City, sheweth the footings of a City indeed, that hath beene destroyed. But what the name should signifie it appeareth not. I for my part have beene of opinion elsewhere, that Varia in the old British language signified a Passage, and accordingly have interpreted these words Durnovaria and Isannaevaria, The passage of a water, and the passage of Isanna. And for this opinion of mine maketh well the situation of VARIS in that place where onely there lyeth o∣pen an easie passage betwixt the hilles. And not three miles from hence standeth Caer-wisk, Caer-wisk. the name whereof although it maketh some shew of Antiquity, yet found I nothing ancient there, nor worth the observation. Beneath this VARIS, or Bodvari, in the vale glideth Cluid, and streightwayes Elwy a little Rivere conjoyneth it selfe with it, where there is a Bishops See. This place the Britans call, according to the River Llan-Elwy, the Englishmen of Asaph the Patron thereof Saint Asaph. Saint Asaph. And the Historiographers, Asaphensis. Neither is the Towne for any beauty it hath, nor the Church for building or bravery me∣morable: yet something would be said of it, in regard of Antiquity. For, Capgrave. about the yeere of our Redemption 560. Kentigern Bishop of Glasco, being fled hither out of Scotland placed heere a Bishops See, and erected a Monastery, having gathered together sixe hundred threescore and three in a religious brother∣hood. Whereof three hundred being unlearned did give themselves to husban∣dry, and as many moe to worke and labour within the Monastery, the rest to Di∣vine Service. Whom hee divided so by Covents, that some of them should con∣tinually give attendance in the Church to the scervie of God. But when he retur∣ned into Scotland, he ordain'd Asaph a most godly and upright man Governor over this Monastery, of whom it tooke the name which now it hath. The Bishop of this See hath under his Jurisdiction about 128. Parishes, the Ecclesiasticall Bene∣fices whereof, were wont to bee bestowed, when the See was voide by the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, without interruption untill the time of King Henry the Eighth, and that by his Archiepiscopall right, which now is counted a Regality. For so we reade in the History of Canterbury. Above this, Ruthlan. Ruthlan, taking the name of the ruddy and red banke of C uid, on which it stands, maketh a good shew with a Castle, but now almost consumed by very age. Lhewellin Ap Sisil Prince of Wales, first built it; and Robert sirnamed de Ruthland, Nephew of Hugh Earle of Chester, was the first that by force wonne it from the Welsh, as being Captaine Lieutenant to the said Hugh, who fortified it with new workes, and bulwarkes: Afterward (as Rob. Abbat de Monte hath writ∣ten) King Henry the Second, when hee had repaired this Castle gave it unto Hugh Beauchamp. Beneath this, Cluid streightwayes emptieth it selfe into the Sea; And albeit the Valley at the very mouth seemeth to carry a lower levell and to lye under the Sea, yet the water never overfloweth into the Vale; but as it were, by a naturall obstacle, sta eth within the very brinkes of the shore, not without the exceeding great admi∣ration of Gods Providence. From hence the shore tending by little and little East∣ward, shooteth forward first by Disart Castle, so called because it was situate on the rising of a cliffe, Basing werke. or as some would have it, as it were Desert: then by Basing werke, which also King Henry the Second granted unto Hugh Beauchamp. Haly-well. Beneath this wee saw the little Towne Haly-well, as one would say, holy well, where there is that fountaine frequented by Pilgrimes for the memoriall of the Christian Virgin Winefride, Saint Winefrid. ravished there perforce and beheaded by a Tyranne, as also for the mosse there growing of a most sweet and pleasant smell. Out of which Well there gusheth forth a Brooke among stones, which represent bloudy spottes upon them; and it carryeth so violent a streame that presently it is able to drive a mill. Over the very Well there standeth a Chappell built of stone right curiously wrought, whereunto adjoyneth a little Church, in a window whereof is portrayed and set out the History of the said Winefride, how her head was cut off, and set on againe by Saint Benn . Neere unto this place in the time of Giraldus, who yet knew not this Well, There was, as himselfe writeth, a rich Veine and gainefull Mine of silver, where men in seeking after silver pierced and pried into the very bowels of the Earth. This part of the Country, because it smileth so pleasantly upon the beholders with a beautifull shew, and was long since subject unto Englishmen, the Welsh na∣med Teg-Engle, that is, Faire England. But whereas one hath tearmed it Tegenia, and thought that the Igeni there planted themselves, take heede I advise you, that you be not overhasty to beleeve him. Certes, the name of the Iceni wrong put downe here deceived the good man. Flint. Then upon the shore, you may see Flint Castle, which King Henry the Second beganne, and King Edward the First finished: and it gave the name unto this Shire: * where King Richard the Second circumvented by them who should have beene most trusty, was cunningly induced to renounce the Crowne as unable for certaine defects to rule; and was delivered into the hands of Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford, who soone after claimed the Kingdome and Crowne being then voide by his cession, as his inheritance descended from King Henry the Third, and to this his devised claime the Parliament assented, and hee was establi∣shed in the Kingdome. After Flint by the East border of the Shire, neere to Ches∣shire, standeth Hawarden commonly called Harden-Castle, Harden. not farre from the shore; out of which when David Lhewellins brother had led away prisoner Roger Clifford, Iustice of Wales, hee raised thereby a most bloudy Warre against himselfe and his people, wherein the Princedome of the Welsh Nation was utterly overthrowne. But this Castle anciently holden by the Seneschalship of the Earles of Chester, was Barons of Mont-hault▪ Or de monte Alto. the seat of the Barons de Mount-hauls, who grew up to a most honourable family, and gave for their Armes in A Shield Azure a Lion rampant Argent: and bettered their dignity and estate by marriage with Cecily one of the coheires of Hugh D'Al∣beney Earle of Arundell. But in the end, for default of male issue Robert the last Baron of this race, made it over as I have said already, to Isabell Queene of England wife to King Edward the Second. Howbeit the possession of the Castle was transferred afterward to the Stanleys, now Earles of Darby. Through the South part of this Shire lying beneath these places above named, wandereth Ale a little River: neere unto which in an hill hard by Kilken, a small village, there is a Well. The water whereof at certaine set times riseth and fal∣leth, after the manner of the Sea-tides. Hope Castle. Upon this Alen, standeth Hope Castle in Welsh Caer-Gurle, in which King Edward the First retired himselfe when the Welsh∣men had upon the sudden set upon his souldiers being out of array: and where good milstones are wrought out of the rocke: Milstones. Mold. also, Mold, in Welsh Guid Cruc a Castle, belonging in ancient time to the Barons of Monthault: both which places shew many tokens of Antiquity. Neere unto Hope, a certaine Gardiner, when I was first writing this worke, dig∣ging somewhat deepe into the ground, happened upon a very ancient peece of worke, concerning which there grew many divers opinions of sundry men: But hee that will with any diligence reade M. Vitruvius Pollio, shall very well perceive, it was nothing else but a Stouph or hote house begunne by the Romanes, who as their riotous excesse grew together with their wealth, Bathes or hote waters. used Bathes exceeding much. In length it was five elns, in breadth foure, and about halfe an eln deepe, enclosed with Walles of hard stone, the paving layed with bricke pargetted with lime morter: the arched roofe over it supported with small pillars made of bricke, which roofe was of tiles pargetted over likewise very smoothe, having holes heere and there through it, wherein were placed certaine earthen pipes of Potters worke, by which the heate was conveyed, and so as hee saith, Volvebant hypocausta vapo∣rem, that is, the Stuples did send away a waulming hote vapour. And who would not thinke this was one of these kindes of worke which Giraldus wondered at especi∣ally in Isca? writing thus as he did of the Romanes workes. That (saith hee) which a man would judge among other things notable, there may you see on every side Stouphs made with marveilous great skill, breathing out heate closely at certaine holes in the sides, and narrow tunnels. Whose worke this was the tiles there did declare being im∣printed with these words LEGIO XX. that is, The twentieth Legion, which, as I have shewed already before, abode at Chester scarce sixe miles a side from hence. Neere unto this River Alen, in a certaine streight set about with woods standeth Coles-hull, Coles-hul. Giraldus tearmeth it Carbonarium collem, that is, Coles Hill, where when King Henry the Second had made preparation with as great care as ever any did, to give Battaile unto the Welsh, the English by reason of their disordered multitude drawing out their Battalions in their rankes, and not ranged close in good array, lost the Field and were defeited: yea and the very Kings standerd was for∣saken by Henry of Essex, who in right of inheritance was Standerd-bearer to the Kings of England. For which cause he being afterwards charged with treason, and by his challenger overcome in combate, had his goods confiscate and seized into the Kings hands, and he displeased with himselfe for his cowardise, put on a coule, and became a Monke. Another little parcell there is of this Shire on this side the River Dee, dismem∣bred as it were from this, English Mailor which the English call English Mailor. Of this I treated in the County of Chester, whiles I spake of Bangor: and there is no reason to ite∣rate the same heere which hath beene already spoken of before. Neither doth it afford any thing in it worth the reporting, Ha-meere. unlesse it be Han-meere, by ae Meres side, whereof a right ancient and worshipfull Family there dwelling, tooke their sir∣name. The Earles of Chester as they skirmished by occasions, Earles of Chester. and advantage of oppor∣tunity with the Welsh, were the first Normans that brought this Country under their subjection, whereupon wee reade in ancient Records. The County of Flint appertaineth to the Dignity of the sword of Chester: and the eldest sonnes of the K.K. of England were in old time stiled by the Title of Earles of Chester and of Flint. But notwithstanding King Edward the First, supposing it would bee very commo∣dious both for the maintenance of his owne power and also to keepe under the Welsh, held in his owne hands both this and all the sea Coast of Wales. As for the in-land Countries, he gave them to his Nobles as he thought good: following herein the policie of the Emperour Augustus, The prudent policie of Ed∣ward the First. who undertooke himselfe to governe the Provinces that were strongest and lay outmost, but permitted Proconsuls by lot to rule the rest. Which he did in shew to defend the Empire, but in very deed to have all the armes and martiall men under his owne command. In this County of Flint there be Parishes in all. 28. PRINCES OF WALES. A S concerning the Princes of Wales of British bloud in ancient times, you may reade in the Historie of Wales published in print: For my part I thinke it re∣quisite and pertinent to my intended purpose to set downe summarily those of latter daies, descended from the Roiall line of England. King Edward the First, unto whom his Father King Henry the Third had graunted the Principalitie of Wales, when hee had obtained the Crowne, and Lhewellin Ap. Gryffith the last Prince of the British race was slaine, and thereby the sinnewes as it were of the Principalitie were cut: in the twelfth yeere of his Reigne, united the same unto the Kingdome of England: See page 114 And the whole Province sware fealty and allegeance unto Edward of Caernarvon his Sonne whom he made Prince of Wales. But King Edward the Second conferred not upon his Sonne Edward, the title of Prince of Wales, but onely the name of Earle of Chester and of Flint, so farre as I ever could learne out of the Records, and by that title summoned him to Parliament being then nine yeeres old. King Ed∣ward the Third first Created his eldest Sonne Edward surnamed the Blacke Prince the Mirour of Chivalry (being then Duke of Cornwall and Earle of Chester) Prince of Wales by solemne investure, See page 164 with a cap of e∣state, and Coronet set on his head, Afterward a golden vierge was used. a gold ring put upon his finger, and a silver vierge delivered into his hand, with the assent of the Parliament: who in the very floure of his martiall glory was taken away by untimely death too too soone, to the universall griefe of all England. Afterwards King Edward the Third invested with the said honour Richard of Bur∣deaux the said Princes Sonne, as heire apparent to the Crowne, who was deposed from his Kingdome by King Henry the Fourth, and having no issue was cruelly dispatched by violent death. The said King Henry the Fourth at the formall request of the Lords and Commons bestowed this Principalitie with the title of Chester and Flint, with solemne in∣vesture, and a kisse in full Parliament upon his eldest Sonne, who glori∣ously bare the name of King Henry the Fifth. His Sonne King Henry the Sixth who at his Fathers death was an Infant in the cradle, confer∣red likewise this honour which he never had himselfe, upon his young Sonne Edward, whose unhappie fortune it was to have his braines da∣shed out cruelly by the faction of Yorke, being taken prisoner at Tewkes∣bury field. Not long after King Edward the Fourth having obtained the Crowne created Edward his young Sonne Prince of Wales, who was afterwards in the lineall succession of Kings, Edward the Fifth of that name. And within a while after his Unkle King Richard the Third who made him away, ordained in his roome, Edward his owne Sonne, whom King Edward the Fourth had before made Earle of Salisburie, but he died quickly after. Then King Henrie the Seventh created his eldest sonne Arthur, Prince of Wales, and when he was dead, Henrie, his other Sonne well knowne in the world by the name of King Henrie the Eighth. Every one of these had the Principality of Wales given un∣to them by the foresaid solemne investure, and delivery of a Patent, To hold to themselves and their Heires, Kings of England. For Kings would not bereave themselves of so excellent an occasion to doe well by their El∣dest Sonnes, but thought it very good policie by so great a benefit to oblige them when they pleased. Queene Mary, Queene Elizabeth and King Edward, the Children of King Henrie the Eighth, although they never had investure, nor Patent, yet were commonly named in their order Princes of Wales. For, at that time, Wales was by authoritie of Parliament so annexed and united to the Kingdome of England, that both of them were governed vnder the same Law: or, that you may reade it abridged out of the Act of Parliament. The Kings Country or dominion of Wales shall stand and continue for ever incorporated, united, and annexed, to and with the Realme of England and all and sin∣gular person and persons borne and to be borne in the said Principali∣tie, Country, or Dominion of Wales, shall have, enioy, and inherit all and singular freedomes, liberties, rights, priviledges, and Lawes, within this Realme, and other the Kings Dominions, as other the Kings Sub∣iects naturally borne within the same, have, enioy, and inherit: and the Lawes, Ordinances, and Statutes of the Realme of England for ever, and none other shall he had, used, practised, and executed in the said Country, or Dominion of Wales, and every part thereof, in like man∣ner, forme, and order, as they be and shall be in this Realme, and in such like manner and forme, as heereafter shall be further established and or∣dained. This Act, and the calme command of King Henrie the Seventh preparing way for it, effected that in a short time, which the violent power of other Kings armes, and especially of Henrie the Fourth with extreame rigour also of Lawes, could not draw on in many yeeres. For e∣ver sithence the British Nation hath continued as faithfully and dutiful∣ly in their Loyall Allegiance to the Crowne of England, as any other part of the Realme whatsoever. Now am I to returne out of Wales into England, and must goe unto the Brigantes. BRIGANTES. B RITAINE, which hitherto hath, as it were, launched out with huge Promontories, looking on the one side toward Germanie, on the other side toward Ireland, now as if it were afraid of the Sea violently inrushing upon it with∣draweth it selfe farther in, and by making larger separati∣ons of lands retireth backe, gathered into a farre narrower breadth. For, it is not past one hundred miles broad from coast to coast, which on both sides passe on in a maner with straight and direct shores Northward, as farre as to Scotland. All this part well neere of the Island, while the Romane Empire stood upright and flourished in Britaine, was inhabited by the BRI∣GANTES. For, Plinie writeth, that they dwelt from the East Sea to the West. A nation this was right valiant, populous withall, and of especiall note among ancient Authors, Brigantes whereof they tooke name. who all doe name them, BRIGANTES, unlesse it be Stephanus onely, in his booke Of Cities; who called them BRIGAE: in which place, that which he wrote of them is defective at this day in the bookes, by reason that the sentence is imperfect. If I should thinke that these were called Brigantes, of Briga, which in the ancient Spanish tongue signified A Citie, I should not satisfie my selfe; seeing it appeareth for certaine out of Strabo, that it is a meere Spanish word. If I were of opinion with Goropius that out of the Low Dutch tongue, they were termed Brigantes, as one would say Free∣hands, should I not obtrude upon you his dreames for dainties? Howsoever the case standeth, our Britanes, or Welsh-men, if they see any of a bad disposition, and audaciously playing lawlesse and lewde parts, use to say of them by way of a common merry quippe, Wharret Brigans, that is, They play the Brigants. And the French-men at this day, alluding as it seemeth to the ancient language of the Gaules, usually terme such lewde fellowes Brigans like as Pirats Ships, Brigantins. See Pasquier i Les Recherche de France. lib. cap. 40. But whether the force of the word was such in old time in the Gaules or Britanes language, or whether our Brigantes were such like men, I dare not determine. Yet, if my memory faile me not, Strabo calleth the Brigan∣tes (a people about Alpes) Grassatores, that is, Robbers, and Iulius a Belgian a young man of desperate boldnesse, who counted power, authority, honestie, and vertue to be nothing but naked names, is in Tacitus surnamed Briganticus. With which kinde of vice, our old Brigantes may seeme to have been tainted, when they so robbed and spoiled the neighbour inhabitants, that the Emperour Antoninus Pius for this cause tooke away a great part of their Country from them, as Pausanias witnesseth, who writeth thus of them: that is, Antoninus Pius cut the Brigantes in Britaine short, of a great part of their Country, because they began to take armes and in hostile maner to invade Genunia, a Region subject to the Romanes. Neither will any, I hope, take this as a reproach: Surely I should seeme farre unlike my selfe, if I fell now to taxe ignominiously any private person, much lesse a Nation. Nei∣ther was this counted a reproachfull imputation in that warlike age, when all Nations reckoned that their right, which they could winne, or hold by might and dint of sword. Roberies, saith Caesar, among the Germans are not no∣ted with infamie, such I meane as are committed without the borders of every State, and they allow the practise thereof to exercise their youth withall, and to keepe them from idlenesse. And for a reason not unlike, the Paeones, among the Greekes are so called, quia Percussores, that is, be∣cause they were cutters: Reinerus Rei∣necciu . The Quadi among the Germans, and the Chaldaei likewise, are reported to have gotten those names, because they used to robbe and kill. Now, in that Florianus Del-Campe, a Spaniard, hath with too much af∣fectation derived our Brigantes from Spaine into Ireland, and from thence into Britaine, grounding upon no other conjecture, but that he found the Citie Bri∣gantia in his owne country Spaine; he hath I feare me, swarved from the truth. For in case our Brigantes and those in Ireland had not the same name both for one cause, I had rather with my friend, the right learned Thomas Savil judge, that as well diuers of our Brigantes, as also other nations of Britaine, from the first comming of the Romanes hither, departed into Ireland, some for desire of quietnesse and ease; others, that the Lordly dominion of the Romanes might not be an eye-sore unto them: Yet are they in Ireland called Brigantes in some Copies. and others againe, because they would not by their good will loose that libertie in their old age, which by nature they were endowed with in their childhood. But that Claudius the Emperour was the first of all the Romanes who set upon these our Brigantes, and brought them under the Romane dominion, Seneca in his Play sheweth by these verses: Ille Britannos Ultra noti littora Ponti & caerueleos Scuta Brigantes, dare Romulaeis colla catenis Jussit, & ipsum nova Romanae jura securis Tremere Oceanum. The Brigants such as seated are beyond the knowne Sea-coast, And Brigants with blew painted shields, he forced with his hoast, To yeeld their necks in Romane chaines, as captive to be led; And even the Ocean this new power of Romane-ax to dred. And yet I have been of this minde, that they were not then conquered, but committed themselves rather into the tuition and protection of the Romanes. For, that which he Poetically endited, the Historiographers doe not mention. And Tacitus recordeth how by occasion at that time of certaine discords risen among the Brigantes, Ostorius who now made preparation for new warres, was hindered and pulled backe, which he with the execution of a few, easily ap∣peased. At which time, the Brigantes had Cartismandua, a right noble and puis∣sant Lady for their Queene, who intercepted Caratacus, and delivered him in∣to the Romanes hands. Herevpon ensued wealth of wealth and prosperitie, ri∣otous and incontinent life: in so much, as forsaking her Husband Venutius his bed, she joyned her selfe in marriage with Vellocatus his Esquire, and made him King. Which foule fact was the overthrow shortly after of her house, and thereby a bloudy and mortall warre was enkindled. The love and affection of the Country went generally with the lawfull Husband, but the Queenes untem∣perate lust and cruelty were peremptory, in maintaining the adulterer. She, by craftie plots and mischievous meanes intercepteth the Brother and kinsfolke of Venutius. Venutius againe for his part pricked forward with shamefull dis∣grace, by the helpe of friends whom he procured, and the rebellion withall of the Brigantes themselves, Cartismandu . Tacitus. brought Cartismandua into great extremities. Then, upon her instant unto the Romanes for aide, Garisons were set, Cohorts and wings o foot and horse were sent, which after sundry skirmishes with vari∣able event delivered her person out of perill: yet so, as that the Kingdome re∣mained to Venutius, and the warre with the Romanes: who were not able to subdue the Brigantes before the time of Vespasian. For, then Petilius Cere∣alis having invaded this Country, fought many battailes, and some of them very bloudy: and either conquered, or else wasted a great part of the Brigantes ▪ Whereas Tacitus writeth, that this Queene of the Brigantes delivered Cara∣cus prisoner unto Claudius the Emperor, there is in that excellent author a ma∣nifest , The putting of one time for another. and the same noted a good while since by Iustus Lipsius deepe∣ly insighted in understanding old authors. For, neither was this Caratacus Prince of the Silures and Ordevices led in pompe at that triumph of Claudi∣us, nor yet Caratacus the Sonne of Cunobelinus (for so is he called in the Romane Fasti, whom Dio nameth Catacratus. ) Of whom Aulus Plautius, if not in the very same yeere, yet in the next following triumphed by way of Ovation. But let others sift out these matters, and thereof I have already said somewhat. In the Emperour Hadrians time, when, as Aelius Spartianus saith, The Britaines could not be contained under the Romanes domi∣nion, it may seeme that these our Brigantes revoited from the Romanes and made a turbulent insurrection. For, had it not been so, there was no cause why Iuvenall who then lived should thus write. Dirue Maurorum attegias, & castra Brigantum. Downe with the Moores sheepe cotes and folds, Downe with the Brigantes forts and holds. Neither afterward in the time of Antoninus Pius, was their courage, as it may seeme, very much abated, when he tooke away part of their territories from them, because they had made rodes, as I have said before, into Genunia, or Gui∣nethia, a Province confederate with the Romanes. If I durst by our Critickes good leave (who in these daies presuming so much of their great wits are supercriticall) me thinks, I could heere cleare Ta∣citus of a fault or two, which sitteth close to him, as concerning the Brigantes. The one is in the twelfth Booke of his Annales, where I would reade, (for Ve∣nutius out of the State of the Iugantes) out of the State of the Brigantes : A place in Ta∣citus corrected. which Tacitus himselfe seemeth to insinuate in the third Booke of his Histories▪ The other, in the life of Agricola. The Brigantes, saith he, under the lea∣ding of a Woman, burnt the Colonie, &c. Where truth would have you reade, The Trinobantes. For he speaketh of Queene Boadicia, who had no∣thing to doe with the Brigantes. But, the Trinobantes, she stirred indeede to rebellion, and burnt the Colonie Maldon. Camalodunum. But, this Country of theirs so exceeding large, which the further it goeth the narrower it waxeth, riseth on high in the mids with continued ridges and edges of hils, (as Italic is raised up with Apenninus ) which make a partition be∣tweene those Counties into which it is now divided. For, beneath those hilles toward the East and the German Sea, lieth Yorke-shire, and the Bishopricke of Duresme; and on the West side, Lancashire, Westmorland, and Cumberland, all which Countries in the first infancy of the English-Saxons Empire, were contained within the Kingdome of the Deiri. For, they call these Countries, the Kingdome of the Nordanhumbers, and divided them in two parts; Deira, called in that age , which is neerer unto us and on this side Tine ; and Bernicia, which lying beyond Tine, reached as farre as Edenborrough Frith in Scotland: which parts although they had their severall Kings for a long time, yet at length grew all to bee one Kingdome. And, that I may note this one thing by the way, whereas in the life of Charles the Great it is read thus, Eardulph King of the Nordanhumbers, that is, De-Irland, being dri∣ven out of his Country unto Charles the Great, &c. Wee must reade ioyntly, Dierland, and understand the place of this Country, and not of Ire∣land, as some have misconceived. EBORACENSIS Comitatus pars Occiden a is vulgo WEST RIDING YORKE-SHIRE. T HE County of YORKE, in the Saxon Tongue , and , commonly YORKE-SHIRE, the greatest Shire by farre, of all England, is thought to bee in a temperate measure fruitfull. If in one place there bee stony and sandy barraine ground, in another place there are for it Corne-fields as rich and fruitfull: if it bee voide and destitute of Woods heere, you shall finde it shadowed there with most thicke Forests: so provi∣dently useth Nature such a temperature, that the whole Countrey may seeme by reason also of that variety more gracefull and delectable. Where it bendeth Westward, it is bounded with the Hilles, I spake of, from Lancashire and West∣morland. On the North side it hath the Bishopricke of Durham, which the River Tees with a continued course separateth from it. On the East side the Germaine Sea lieth sore upon it: and the South side is enclosed first with Cheshire and Darby-shire, then with Nottingham-shire, and after, with Lincoln-shire, where that famous arme of the Sea Humber floweth betweene, Humber. into which all the Rivers well neere that water this shire empty themselves, as it were, into their common receptacle. This whole Shire is divided into three parts: which according to three Quar∣ters of the world are called The West-Riding, The East-Riding, and The North-Riding. West-Riding, for a good while is compassed in with the River First called Ure and Your West-Riding. Ouse, with the bound of Lancashire, and with the South limits of the shire, and beareth toward the West and South. East-Riding, looketh to the Sunne-rising and the Ocean, which to∣gether with the River Derwent encloseth it. North-Riding reacheth Northward, hemmed in, as it were, with the River Tees with Derwent and a long race of the River Ouse. In that West part, out of the Westerne Mountaines or Hilles in the Confines, issue many Rivers which Ouse alone entertaineth every one, and carryeth them all with him unto Humber. Neither can I see any fitter way to describe this part, than to follow the streames of Done, Calder, Are, Wherse, Nid and Ouse, which springing out of these Hilles, are the Rivers of most account, and runne by places likewise of greatest importance. The River Danus, The river Do commonly called Don, and Dune, so termed, as it should seeme for that it is carried in a chanell somewhat flat, shallow and low by the ground (for so much signifieth Dan in the British language) after it hath saluted Wortley, Wortley. which gave sirname to a worshipfull Family, Wentworth. as also Wentworth hard by, whence beside o∣ther Gentlemen as well in this Country, as elsewhere, the Barons of Wentworth have derived both their originall and name; Sheafield. runneth first by Sheafield a Towne of great name (like as other small Townes adjoyning) for the Smithes therein (considering there bee many iron Mines thereabout) fortified also with a strong and ancient Castle, Furnivall. which in right line descended from the Lovetofts, the Lords Furnivall, and Thomas Lord Nevill of Furnivall, unto the Talbots, Earles of Shrewesbury. From thence Don clad with alders, Rotheram. and other trees goeth to Rotheram, which glorieth in Thomas Rotheram sometime Archbishop of Yorke, a wise man, bearing the name of the Towne, being borne therein, and a singular benefactor thereunto, who foun∣ded and endowed there a College with three Schooles in it to teach children wri∣ting, Grammar, and Musicke, which the greedy iniquity of these our times hath already swallowed. Then looketh it up to Connisborrow or Conines-borrough an ancient Castle, Connis-bor∣row. Florilegus. 487. in the British tongue Caer Conan, seated upon a Rocke, into which, what time as Aurelius Ambrosius had so discomfited and scattered the English Saxons at Maisbelly, that they tooke them to their heeles, and fled every man the next way hee could finde, Hengest their Captaine retired himselfe for safety: and few daies after brought his men forth to battaile before the Captaine against the Britans that pursued him, where hee fought a bloudy field to him and his: For, a great number of men were there cut in peeces: and the Britans having intercepted him, chopt off his head, if wee may beleeve the British History rather than the English-Saxon Chronicles, which re∣port that he being outworne with travell and labour, died in peace. But this Conings∣borough in latter ages was the possession of the Earles of Warren. Afterwards, hee runneth under Sprotburg the ancient seat of that ancient family of the Fitz-Williams Knights, who are most honourably allied and of kin to the noblest houses of Eng∣land, and from whom descended Sir William Fitz-Williams Earle of Southampton, The Family of Fitz-Williams. in our fathers remembrance, and Sir William Fitz-Williams late Lord Deputy of Ire∣land. But in processe of time this is fallen to the Copleys, like as Elmesly with other possessions of theirs in this Tract, are come by right of inheritance to the Savils. From hence Done running with a divided streame hard to an old towne, giveth it his owne name, which we at this day call Dan-castre, the Scots Don-Castle, the Saxons Dona- , Dan-castre. Ninius, Caer Daun, but Antonine the Emperour DANUM, like as the booke of Notices: which hath recorded that the Captaine of the Crispinian Horse∣men, lay there in Garison under the Generall of Britaine. This about the yeere of our Lord 759. was so burnt with fire from heaven, and lay so buried under the owne ruines, that it could scarce breath againe. A large plot it sheweth yet, where a Cita∣dell stood, which men thinke was then consumed with fire: in which place I saw the Church of S. Georges, a faire Church, and the onely Church they have in the Towne. Tickhill. Beneath this Towne Southward scarce five miles off is Tickhill, which I am not willing to omit, an old towne, fensed with as old a Castle, large enough, but having onely a single Wall about it, and with an high Mount whereon standeth a round Keepe. It carryed in old time such a Dignity with it, that the Manours and Lords belonging thereto were called The Honour of Tickhill. In the Raigne of Henry the First Roger Busly held the possession thereof: Afterwards the Earles of Ewe in Nor∣mandy were long since Lords of it by the gift of King Stephen. Pla . anno. 3. Ioan. Reg. Pl. M. 4. H. 3. Then King Richard the First gave it unto John his brother. In the Barons Warre Robert de Vipont detei∣ned it for himselfe, which that hee should deliver unto the Earle of Ewe, King Hen∣ry the Third put into his hands, the Castle of Carleol, and the County. But when the King of France would not restore unto the English againe their possessions in France, the King of England retained it unto himselfe, when as John Earle of Ewe in the right of Alice his great Grandmother claimed of King Edward the First restitu∣tion thereof. At length Richard the Second King of England liberally gave it unto John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. But now by this time Done that often riseth heere and overfloweth the fields, ga∣thering his divided waters into one streame againe, when he hath for a while runne in one Chanell through Hatfeld Chace (where there is great game and hunting of red Deere) being divided eft-soone, speedeth himselfe on the one hand to Idel a Ri∣ver in Nottingham-shire, on the other to Are, that hee and they together may fall into Humber. In which very place there are environed with these rivers Diche-marc and Marshland, Marshland. little Mersh Countries or River-Islands rather, taking up in circuit much about fifteene miles, most plentifull of greene grasse, passing good for fee∣ding of Cattaile, and on every side garnished, as it were, with prety Townes. Yet some of the Inhabitants are of opinion, that the land there, is hollow and hanging, yea and that, as the waters rise, the same also is heaved up: a thing that Pomponius Mela hath written concerning Antrum an Isle in France. But among those Beakes and Brookes that convey their streames hither, I must not overpasse Went, Nosthill. Saint Oswalds. which floweth out of a standing Poole neere unto Nosthill, where sometime stood an Abbay consecrated to Oswald, both a King and a Saint which A. Confessour to King Henry the First reedified. But since the dissolution it hath beene the dwelling house of the Gargraves, Knights of especiall good respect. Calder springing in the very Confines of Lancashire, The River Calder. runneth along certaine Townes of no account; among which, at Gretland in the top of an Hill (where∣unto there is no ascent but of one side) was digged up this Votive Altar; erected, as it should seeme, to the tutelar God of the whole State of the Brigants: which Al∣tar was to bee seene at Bradley, in the house of the right worshipfull Sir John Savill Knight, Baron of the Exchequer, but now among Sir Robert Cottons Antiquities. On the other side. DUI CI. BRIG. ET NUM. AUGG. T. AUR. AURELIAN US DD PRO SE ET SUIS. S. M. A. G. S. ANTONINO III. Anno Christi 209. ET GET. COSS. That is, To the God of the whole Communalty and state of the Brigantes, and to the sa∣cred Majesty of the Augusti, Titus Aurelius Aurelianus hath dedicated for himselfe and his. (The letters that bee last of all passe my skill altogether) When Antonine the third time, and Geta were Consuls. Now whether that DUI, DVI. The Genii of Places. be God, whom the Britans now call Diw, or a peculiar locall God, or Genius of the Brigantes, I leave for to be discussed by them, that are bet∣ter learned. Like as the soules are divided and distributed among them that are borne (saith Symmachus) even so are Fatall Genij, Lib. Ep. 40. among Nations. And the divine minde allotteth sun∣dry keepers and Guardians to particular Countries. For, thus they were in old time per∣swaded in their Divinity, and thus they beleeved. And, to say nothing of forraine Nations, whose History is very full of such peculiar and locall Gods; the Britans had in that part which now is called ESSEX, ANDATES: in Cumberland, BEL∣LO-TUCADRUS: in Northumberland, VITERINUS, and MOGONTUS, as shall appeare more evidently out of those Inscriptions, which I will set downe in due place. Servius Honoratus likewise hath well and truely observed, that these Locall or Topick Gods doe never passe unto other Countries. But to returne unto the River Calder: which when by the comming in of other waters hee is growne bigge and carryeth a fuller streame, hath a faire Bridge over it at Eland: neere unto which, at Grimscarre, were brickes found with this Inscription. COH. IIII. BRE. For, the Romanes flourishing in military prowesse, in great wisedome and po∣licie exercised both their Legions and Cohorts in time of peace, Vopiscus in Probus. to withstand Idle∣nesse; by casting of ditches, making of High-waies, baking of brickes, building of Bridges, &c. Calder afterward among the very Hilles leaveth on the left hand Halifax a most famous Towne, Halifax. Some would have it to be called afore∣time, the Chap¦pell in the Grove. lying from West to East upon the steepe descent of an Hill. And not many ages since, tooke it this name; whereas before time it was called Horton, as some of the Inhabitants doe report, who tell this prety story also, touching the alteration of the name. A certaine Clerke, as they call him, was farre in love with a maiden who when hee might not have his purpose of her, for all the faire meanes and enticements hee could use, his love being turned unto rage (vilanous Wretch that hee was) cut off the Maides head; which being hung afterwards upon an Eugh tree, the common people counted as an hallowed Relique, untill it was rotten, yea and they came devoutly to visit it, and every one gathered and carryed away with him a branch or sprig of the said tree. But after the tree was bare and nothing left but the very stocke (such was the credulity of that time) it maintained the opinion of reve∣rence and Religion still. For, the people were perswaded, that the little veines that are stretched out and spred betweene the barke and body of the Eugh tree in man∣ner of haires or fine threads, were the very haires indeed of the Virgins head. Here∣upon they that dwelt thereabout repaired on Pilgrimage hither, and such resort there was unto it, that Horton being but a little Village before, grew up to a great Towne, Fax, what it is. and was called by a new name Halig-Fax, or Hali-fex, that is Holy haire. For, the Englishmen dwelling beyond Trent, called the haire of the head Fax. Whence also there is a Family in this Country, of Gentlemen, named Faire-fax, of the faire bush of their haire. They therefore, which by resemblance of the name gather this to bee Ptolomees Olicana, Halifax law. bee farre deceived. Now this place is become famous as well among the multitude by reason of a Law there, whereby they behead streightwaies whosoever are taken stealing: as also amongst the learned: for they report that Joannes de Sacro Bosco the Author of the Sphaere, was here borne: yet more famous it is, for the greatnesse of the Parish, which reckoneth in it eleven Chappels; whereof two, be Parish-Chappels, and to the number of twelve thousand people therein. So that the Inhabitants are wont to give out, that this Parish of theirs maintaineth more men and women, than other living creatures of what kinde soe∣ver. Whereas you shall see elsewhere in England, in the most fruitfull and fer∣tile places, many thousands of Sheepe, and very few men, as if folke had given place to flockes of Sheepe, and heards of Neat, or else were devoured of them. Moreover, the industry of the Inhabitants heere is admirable, who in a barraine Soile, wherein there is no commodious, nay scarce any dwelling and living at all, have so come up and flourished by Clothing (a trade which they tooke to not above threescore and tenne yeeres agoe at the farthest) that they greatly enrich their owne estates, and winne the praise from all their neighbours: yea, and have pro∣ved the saying to be true, That barraine places give a good edge to industrie: and that hence it is, that Norinberg in Germanie, Venice and Genua in Italie, and Limoges in France, situate all in barraine places are become right flourishing Cities. Sixe miles from hence and not farre from the right side of the River Calder, neere unto Al∣mond-bury a little Towne, Almond-bury. standing upon an high and steepe Hill which hath no easie passage on even ground unto it but of one side, are seene the manifest tokens of a Rampire, some ruines of walles and of a Castle, which was guarded about with a triple strength of Forts and Bulwarkes. Some will have this also to have beene OLICANA: Cambodunum. But the trueth saith otherwise, and namely that it is CAMBODU∣NUM, which Ptolomee calleth amisse CAMULODUNUM, and Beda by a word divided CAMPO-DUNUM. This is prooved by the distance thereof, on the one side from MANCUNIUM, on the other from CALCARIA, according to which Antonine placeth it. More∣over, it seemeth to have flourished in very great honour, when the English Saxons first beganne to rule. For, the Kings Towne it was, and had in it a Cathedrall Church built by Paulinus the Apostle of these parts, and the same dedicated to Saint Alban: whence in stead of Albon-bury, it is now called Almon-bury. But when Ceadwall the Britan and Penda the Mercian made sharpe warre upon Edwin the Prince of these Countries, it was set on fire by the enemy, as Beda writeth, which the very adust and burnt colour as yet remaining upon the stones doth testifie. Yet afterwards there was a Castle built in the same place, which King Stephen, as I have read, confir∣med unto Henry Lacy. Hard unto it lyeth Whitly, Whitley. the habitation of an ancient and notable Family of Beaumont, which notwithstanding is different from that House of the Barons and Vicounts Beau-mont, yet it was of great name in this Tract before their comming into England. Calder now leaving these places behinde him, Kirkley. and having passed by Kirkley an house in times past of religious Nunnes; and the Tombe of Robin Hood that right good and honest Robber (in which regard he is so much spoken of) goeth to Dews∣borrough seated under an high Hill. Dewsbor∣rough. Whether it had the name of DVI that tutelar God of the place, of whom I wrote a little before, I am not able to say: Surely the name is not unlike, for it soundeth as much as Duis Burgh, and flourished at the very first infancy, as it were, of the Church springing up amongst the English∣men in this Province: for, I have heard, that there stood a Crosse heere with this Inscription. PAULINUS HIC PRAEDICA∣VIT ET CELEBRAVIT. that is, PAULINUS HERE PREACHED AND CELEBRATED DIVINE SERVICE. And that this Paulinus was the first Archbishop of Yorke, about the yeere of our Redemption 626. all Chronicles doe accord. From hence Calder running by Thorn∣hill (which from Knights of that sirname is descended to the Savills ) passeth hard by Wakefield a Towne famous for clothing, Wakefield. for greatnesse, for faire building, a well frequented Mercate, and a Bridge: upon which King Edward the Fourth erected a beautifull Chappell, in memoriall of those that lost their lives there in battaile. The Possession sometime this was of the Earles of Warren and of Surry, as also Sandall Castle adjoyning, which John Earle of Warren (who was alwaies fleshly lust∣full) built, when he had used the wife of Thomas Earle of Lancaster more familiarly than honesty would require, to the end he might deteine and keepe her in it secure∣ly, from her Husband. 1460. By this Townes side, when the civill warre was hote heere, in England and setled in the very bowels thereof, Richard Duke of Yorke, father to King Edward the Fourth (who chose rather to hazard his fortune: than to stay the good time thereof) was slaine in the field by those that tooke part with the House of Lancaster. The Tract lying heere round about for a great way together, is called The Seigniory or Lordship of Wakefield, and hath alwaies for the Seneschall or Steward one of the better sort of Gentlemen dwelling thereby. Which Office the Savills have oftentimes borne, who are heere a very great and numerous Family, and at this day Sir John Savill Knight beareth it, The Savils. Howley. who hath a very sightly faire house not farre off at Howley, which maketh a goodly shew. Calder is gone scarce five miles farther, when he betaketh both his water and his name also to the River Are. Where, at their very meeting together standeth betweene them Medley, Medley. in times past , so called for the situation, as it were, in the middest betweene two Rivers. The seat it was in the age aforegoing, of Sir Robert Waterton Master of the Horse to King Henry the Fourth, but now of Sir John Savill a right worshipfull Knight, and a most worthy Baron of the Kings Exchequer, whom I acknowledge full gladly in his love and courtesie to have favoured me, and out of his learning to have furthered this worke. The River Are. This river Are springing out of the bothom of the hill Pennigent, which a∣mong the Westerne hils mounteth aloft above the rest, doth forthwith so sport him∣selfe with winding in and out, as doubtfull whether hee should returne backe to his spring-head, or runne on still to the sea, that my selfe in going directly forward on my way was faine to passe over it seven times in an houres riding. It is so calme, and milde, and carryeth so gentle and slow a streame, that it seemeth not to runne at all but to stand still, whence I suppose it tooke the name. For, as I have said before, Ara in the British tongue betokeneth Milde, Still, and Slow ; whereupon that slow Ri∣ver in France Araris hath his name. Araris in France. Craven. The Country lying about the head of this River, is called in our tongue Craven, perchance of the British word Crage, that is, a Stone. For, the whole Tract there, is rough all over and unpleasant to see to, with craggy stones, hanging rockes, and rugged waies: in the middest whereof, as it were in a lurking hole, Skipton. not farre from Are, standeth Skipton : and lyeth hidden and enclosed among steepe Hilles, Latium. in like manner as Latium in Italie, which Varro supposeth to have beene so called, because it lyeth close under Apennine and the Alpes. The Towne (for the manner of their building among these Hilles) is faire e∣nough, and hath a very proper and a strong Castle, which Robert de Rumeley built, by whose posterity it came by inheritance to the Earles of Aumarle. And when their inheritance for default of heires fell by escheat into the Kings hands, Robert de Clif∣ford, whose heires are now Earles of Cumberland, by way of exchange obtained of King Edward the Second both this Castle, and also faire lands round about it every way, delivering into the Kings hands in lieu of the same, the possessions that he had in the Marches of Wales. When Are is once past Craven, hee spreadeth broader and passeth by more plea∣sant fields lying on each side of it, Kigheley. and Kigheley among them, which gave name to the worshipfull Family of Kigheley, so sirnamed thereof. Of which Family, Henry Kighe∣ley obtained of king Edward the First for this Manour of his The Liberty of a Mercate and Faire, and free warren. So that no man might enter into those lands to bunt and chace in them, or to take any thing that pertained to the Warren, without the licence and good will of Henry himselfe and his Successours. Which was counted in that age for a speciall favour, and I note it once for all, that we may see, what Free Warren was. But the male issue of this Family in the right line ended in Henry Kigheley of Inskip. Howbeit, the daughters and heires were wedded to William Cavendish, now Baron Cavendish of Hardwick, and to Thomas Worseley of Boothes. From hence Are passeth beside Kirk∣stall, an Abbay in times past of no small reckoning, founded by Henry Lacy, in the yeere 1147. Leedes. and at length visiteth Leedes, in the Saxon tongue , which be∣came a house of the Kings, when CAMBODUNUM was by the enemy burnt to the ground: now a rich Towne by reason of clothing, where Oswy king of Northum∣berland put to flight Penda the Mercian: And, as Bede saith, this was to the great profit of both Nations: for he both delivered his owne people from the hostile spoiling of the mis∣creants, and also converted the Mercians themselves to the grace of Christian Faith. The very place wherein they joyned battaile, Winwidfield. the writers call Winwidfield, which name I sup∣pose was given it of the Victory: like as a place in Westphalia, where Quintilius Varus with his legions was slaine, is in the Dutch tongue called Winfield, that is, The fields of victory, as that most learned man and my very good friend Abraham Ortelius hath observed. The little Region or Territory about it, was in times past by an old name called Elmet: Elme . which Eadwin king of Northumberland, the sonne of AElla, af∣ter hee had expelled Cereticus a British king, Ninius. Calx viva. conquered in the yeere of Christ 620. Herein is digged limestone every where, which is burnt at Brotherton, and Knotting∣ley and at certaine set times, as it were, at Faires, a mighty quantity thereof is convei∣ed to Wakefield, Sandall, and Stanbridge: and so is sold unto this Westerne Country which is hilly and somewhat cold, for to manure and enrich their Corne fields. But let us leave these things to Husbandmen: as for my selfe I professe my ignorance therein, and will goe forward as I beganne. At length Are entertaineth Calder aforesaid with his water as his Guest, where neere unto the meeting of both Rivers, Castleford. standeth Castleford a little Village, Marianus nameth it Casterford: who reporteth, that the Citizens of Yorke slew many of king Ethelreds Army there, whom in their pursuite they set upon and charged heere and there at advantages; what time as hee invaded and overranne this Country for breaking the allegeance they had sworne unto him. But in Antonine, this place is called by a more ancient name LEGEOLIUM and LAGETIUM: Legeolium▪ Wherein beside expresse and notable tokens of Antiquity, a mighty number of Roman pee∣ces of money (the common people there tearme them, Sarasins head ) were found at Beanfield (a place so called now of Beanes) hard by the Church: The distance also from DAN and YORKE, betweene which he placed it, doth most cleerely con∣firme as much: to say nothing of the situation thereof hard by the Romanes High Street, and last of all for that Roger Hoveden in plaine tearmes calleth it A City. From hence Are being now bigger, after it hath received Calder unto it, leaveth on the left hand Brotherton a little Towne; in which Queene Margaret, turning thi∣ther out of the way as she road on hunting, was delivered of childe, and brought forth unto her Husband king Edward the First, Thomas de Brotherton, so named of the place, who was afterward Earle of Norfolke ; and Mareshall of England. And not farre beneath, Are after it hath received into it Dan, looseth himselfe in Ouse. On the right hand, where a yellower kinde of marke is found, which being cast and spred up∣on the fields maketh them beare Corne for many yeeres together, he passeth by Pont∣tract, T. de castle ford. commonly called Pontfret, situate not farre from the river banke, which Towne gat life, as it were, by the death of old Legeolium. In the Saxons time it was called Kirkby, but the Normans of a broken Bridge named it in French Pontfract. Upon this occasion, it is commonly thought, that the wooden Bridge over Are hard by, was broken, Saint Willi of Yorke. when a mighty multitude of people accompanied William Archibi∣shop a great number fell into the River, and yet by reason that the Archbishop shed many a teare at this accident, and called upon God for helpe: there was not one of them that perished. Seated it is in a very pleasant place, that bringeth forth Liquirice and skirworts in great plenty, adorned also with faire buildings, and hath to shew a stately Castle as a man shall see, situate upon a rocke no lesse goodly to the eye, than safe for the defence, Lacy the Nor∣man. well fortified with ditches and bulwarkes. Hildebert Lacy a Nor∣man, unto whom king William the First, after that Alricke the Saxon was thrust out, had given this Towne with the land about it, first built this Castle. But Henry Lacy his nephew, Placit. 11. came into the field at the battaile of Trenchbrey (I speake out of the Pleas) against King Henry the First: wherefore hee was disseised of the Barony of Pontfract, and the King gave the Honour to Wido de Lavall, who held it untill King Stephens dayes: at which time, the said Henry made an entry into the Barony, and by mediation of the King compounded with Wido, for an hundred and fifty pounds. This Henry had a sonne na∣med Robert ; who having no issue, left Albreda Lizours his sister by the mothers side, and not by the father, to bee his heire, because hee had none other so neere in bloud unto him: whereby shee, after Roberts death, kept both inheritances in her hand, namely of her brother Lacies, and her father Lizours. And these be the very words of the booke of the Monastery of Stanlow. The booke Stanlow M nastery. This Albreda, was marryed to Richard Fitz Eustach, Con∣stable of Chester, whose Heires assumed unto them the name of Lacies, and flou∣rished under the title of Earles of Lincolne. See Earles Lincolne. By a daughter of the last of these Lacies, this goodly inheritance by a deede of conveyance was devolved in the end to the Earles of Lancaster, who enlarged the Castle very much, and Queene Elizabeth likewise bestowed great cost in repairing it, and beganne to build a faire Chappell. This place hath beene infamous for the murder and bloudshed of Princes: For, Thomas Earle of Lancaster, Thomas of Lancaste the first of Lancastrian House that in right of his wife possessed it, stained and embrewed the same with his owne bloud. For, King Ed∣ward the Second to free himselfe from rebellion and contempt shewed upon him a good example of wholsome severity, and beheaded him heere. Whom notwith∣standing standing the common people enrolled in the Beadroll of Saints. Heere also was that Richard the Second King of England; whom King Henry the Fourth deposed from his Kingdome with hunger, cold, and strange kindes of torments, most wickedly made away. And heere King Richard the Third caused Antonie Earle Rivers, King Edward the Fifth his Unkle by the mothers side, and Sir Richard Grey knight, halfe brother to the same King by the mothers side, both innocent persons, to loose their heads. For the Usurper feared, least those courageous and resolute men would stop his passage, aspiring as he did by wicked meanes to the Crowne; As for the Abbay, which the Lacies heere founded for religious persons, and the Hospitall which Sir Robert Knolles erected for poore people, I let passe wittingly, seeing there is scarce a∣ny rubbish now remaining of those good workes. From LEGEOLIUM or Castleford abovesaid, leaving behinde us Shirburne, a lit∣tle Towne but well inhabited, which tooke name of the cleere bourne or Riveret, and which King Athelstane graunted unto the Archbishops of Yorke, by the high ridge or Port way raised up of a great heigth, Aberford. we came to Aberford, a little Village situate upon the said way, famous onely for making of pinnes, which by womens judgement are especially commended as the best. Under this the little River Coc (in bookes, na∣med Cokarus ) runneth, and in the descent downe thereunto, the foundations of an old Castle, Cary Castle. which they call Castle Cary, are to be seene. Scarce two miles from hence, at the spring head of Coc, Barwic in Elmet. standeth Barwic in Elmet the royall house or seat, by re∣port, in times past of the kings of Northumberland, which was environed about with walles, as the very ruines and ruble thereof seeme to testifie. On the other side is pla∣ced Hesselwood the principall seat of that worthy and right ancient family of the Va∣vasours, Hesselwood. Vavasores or Valvaforces. who by their Office (for the kings Valvasors in times past they were) tooke to them this name: and in the latter daies of King Edward the First Sir William Vavasor was called among other Barons of the Realme unto the high Court of Parliament, as appeareth in the very Writs, as they call them, of Summons. Under this place li∣eth that most famous delfe or quarry of stone, Petres-post. called Peters post, for that with the stones hewed out of it, by the liberall grant of the Vavasors, that stately and sump∣tuous Church of Sant Peters at Yorke was reedified. From Aberford the said Riveret Coc speedeth immediately to the River Wherf, as it were, sad, sorrowfull, and with heavie cheere, in detestation of all civill warres, since time that he ranne all died with English bloud. For, upon his banke neere unto Towton a little country Village, was (as I may truely say) that our English Pharsalia. In no place ever saw our England such puissant forces, The battaile at Towton. so much Gentry and Nobility together: an hundred thousand fighting men, and no fewer, of the one side and the other: Never were there leaders and Captaines on both parts more fierce, hardy, and resolute, never more cheerefull and forward to fight; who upon Palme Sunday, in the yeere 1461. in battaile array with banner displaied, entred the field and encoun∣tred. And when they had continued a doubtfull and variable fight a great part of the day, at length the Lancastrians not able to abide any longer the violence of their e∣nemies (the chiefe cause of whose overthrow was the disordered unwealdinesse of their owne Army) turned backe and fled amaine: And those that tooke part with Yorke, being eager upon execution, followed them in chase so hotely, that they had the killing of a number of Noblemen and Gentlemen, and thirty thousand English∣men were that day left dead in the field. But I leave this to the Historians. Some∣what lower, neere unto Shirburne, at Huddleston a little Village, is a famous stone quarry, A quarry of stone. out of which the stones when they are newly hewen be very soft, but after they bee seasoned with winde and weather, they become of themselves exceeding solid and hard. But (to returne) Coc making no long course sheadeth himselfe into Wherf. The River Wherf. This Wherf or Wharf, in the English Saxons language , commeth downe out of Craven, and for a great while runneth in a parallell distance even with Are. If a man should thinke the name to bee wrested from the word Guer, which in British signifieth Swift and violent, verily, the nature of that River concurreth with his opi∣nion; For, he runneth with a swift and speedy streame, making a great noise as hee goeth, as if he were froward, stubborne and angry; and is made more fell and teasty with a number of stones lying in his chanell, which he rolleth and tumbleth before him in such sort that it is a wonder to see the manner of it, but especially when hee swelleth high in Winter. And verily it is a troublesome River and dangerous even in Summer time also, which I my selfe had experience of, not without some perill of mine owne, when I first travailed over this Country. For, it hath such slippery stones in it, that an horse can have no sure footing on them, or else the violence of the water carryeth them away from under his feete. In all his long course which from the spring head unto Ouse is almost fifty miles, he passeth onely by little Townes of no especiall account: Kilnesey Cra running downe by Kilnesey Cragge, the highest and steepest rocke that ever I saw in a midland Country by Burnsall, where Sir William Craven Knight and Alderman of London there borne, is now building of a Stone bridge: who also hard by, of a pious minde and beneficiall to his Country hath of late founded a Grammar Schoole; also by Barden-Towre, a little turret belonging to the Earle of Cumberland, where there is round about good store of game and hunting of fat Deere: by Bolton, where sometime stood a little Abbay: by Bethmesley, the seat of the notable Family of Claphams, out of which came John Clapham a worthy Warriour, in the civill broiles betweene Lancaster and Yorke. From thence com∣meth he to Ilekeley, Ilekeley. Olicana. which considering the site in respect of Yorke out of Ptolomee, and the affinity of the name together, I would judge to be OLICANA. Surely that it is an old Towne (beside the Columnes engraven with Roman worke lying in the Churchyard and elsewhere) and was in Severus time reedified by the meanes of Of him U pian maketh mention lib. de Vulgari & pupillari sub∣stitutione. Virius Lupus, Lieutenant Generall and Propraetor then of Britaine, this inscription lately digged up hard by the Church doth plainly shew. IM. SEVERUS. AUG. ET ANTONINUS CAES. DESTINATUS RESTITUERUNT, CURAN∣TE VIRIO LUPO. Legato. LEG. E∣ORUM Pro Praetor PR. PR. That the second Cohort of the Lingones abode heere, an Altar beareth witnesse, which I saw there, upholding now the staires of an house, and having this Inscripti∣on set upon it by the Captaine of the second Cohort of the Lingones, to VERBEIA, haply the Nymph or Goddesse of Wherf, the River running thereby, which River they called VERBEIA as I suppose, out of so neere affinity of the names. VERBEIAE SACRUM CLODIUS FRONTO PRAEF. COH. II LINGON. For, Rivers, as Gildas writeth, in that age, had by the blinde and ignorant people of Britaine, divine honours heaped upon them. And Seneca sheweth, that in times past, Al∣tars were erected unto them: Epist. 41. We worship, saith he, The heads of great Rivers, and the sudden breaking forth of an huge River out of an hidden and secret place hath Altars conse∣crated unto it. Againe, All waters, as Servius Honoratus saith, had their severall Nymphs, to take the rule and protection of them. Moreover in a Wall of the Church is fastened this broken and unperfect Inscription. — RUM CAES. AUG. — ANTONINI ET VERI JOVI DILECTI CAECILIUS PRAEF. COH. But in the very Church it selfe, whiles I sought diligently for monuments of Ro∣mane Antiquity, I found nothing but the Image in stone all armed, of Sir Adam Midleton: who seemeth to have flourished under King Edward the First, and whose posterity remaineth yet in the Country heereby, at Stubbam. Otley. More beneath standeth Otley a Towne of the Archbishops of Yorke: but it hath nothing memorable, unlesse it bee one high and hard craggy cliffe, called Chevin under which it is situate. Chevin. Chervin, what it signifieth. For, the ridge of an hill, the Britans terme Chevin: whence I may conjecture that that continued ridge of mountaines in France, where in old time they spake the same language that Britans did, Gevenna. was called Gevenna and Geben∣na. After this, Wherf runneth hard by, with his bankes on both sides reared up, and consisting of that Limestone which maketh grounds fat and fertile: where I saw Harewood Castle of good strength, Harewood. which by the alteration of times, hath often chan∣ged his Lords. Placit. 1. Joan. Rot. 10. in D. Monstr. le Droit. 35. F. 1. Long since it belonged to the Curcies, but by Alice an inheritrice it came to Wa∣rin Fitz-Gerold, who had taken her to wife; whose daughter Margerie and one of his heires, being endowed with a very great estate of living, was first married unto Baldwin de Rivers or Red ers. Ripariis, the Earles sonne of Devon-shire, who dyed before his father: afterwards to Folque de Brent, by the beneficiall favour of King John, for his appro∣ved service in pilling, polling, and spoiling most cruelly. But when at length Isa∣bell de Rivers or Red ers. Ripariis Countesse of Devon-shire departed this life without issue: This Ca∣stle fell unto Robert de L'isle the sonne of Warin, as unto her cozin in bloud and one of her heires: in the end by those of Aldborrough, it descended to the ithers, as I am enformed by Francis Thinn, who very diligently and judiciously hath a long time hunted after Pedigree antiquities. Neither is Gawthorp adjoyning hereby to be con∣cealed in silence, when as the ancient Family of Gascoignes descended out of Gas∣coigne in France as it seemeth, Gascoignes. hath made it famous both with their vertue and An∣tiquity. From hence runneth Wherf hard by Wetherby, Wetherby. a Mercate Towne of good note, which hath no antiquity at all to shew, but a place only, beneath it (they call it usually now, Saint Helens Fourd ) where the high Roman street crossed over the river. From thence he passeth downe by Tadcaster, Tadcaster. a very little towne, yet I cannot but thinke as well by the distance from other places, as by the nature of the soile, and by the name, that it was CALCARIA. Calcaria. For, it is about nine Italian miles from Yorke, according as Antonine hath set CALCARIA. Also the limestone which is the very soader and binder of all morter, and hardly elsewhere in this tract to be found, heere is digged up in great plenty and vented as farre as to Yorke and the whole Country borde∣ring round about, for use in building. Considering then that the said Lime, was by the Britans and Saxons in old time, Calcarienses. De Decurionibu L. 27. The Romane language in Provinces. and is by the Northren Englishmen called after the Roman name Calc (For, that imperious City Rome, imposed not their yoke onely, but their language also upon the subdued Nations) seeing also that in the Code of Theodosius, those bee tearmed Calcarienses who are the burners of limestone: it may not seeme absurd, if the Etymology of the name be fetched from Calx, that is, Chalke or Lime: even as Chalcis, Augustin. lib. 19 de Civitate Dei of , that is, brasse, Ammon of , that is, Sand, Pteleon, of , that is, Elmes, and Calcaria a City of Cliveland, haply of Calx, that is, Lime, tooke their names: especially seeing that Bede calleth it also Calca-cester. Where he reporteth, that Heina the first woman in this Country that put on the Vaile and reli∣gious habite of a Nunne, retyred her selfe apart to this City, and therein made her abode. Moreover, an Hill neere to the Towne is called Kelc-bar, in which there lieth couched somewhat of the ancient name. Neither are there other arguments wan∣ting, to prove the antiquity thereof: For, to say nothing how it is situate upon a port high way, there be peeces of the Roman Emperours money oftentimes digged up, and the tokens of the Trenches and Bankes that compassed it about, the plot also where an old Castle stood, yet remaining, out of the reliques whereof, not many yeeres agoe was a Bridge built, which when Wherf is once passed under, he becom∣meth more still, and so gently intermingleth his water with Ouse. And verily a thing it is in my judgement to be wondered at, That Wherf being encreased with so many waters, in Summer time runneth so shallow under this Bridge, that one com∣ming hither about Midsommer, when he saw it, pretily and merrily versified thus: Nil Tadcaster habet Musis, vel carmine dignum, Praeter magnificè structum sine flumine pontem. Nought hath Tadcaster worth my Muse, and that my verse deserv's, Itinerarium. T. Edes. Unlesse a faire Bridge stately built, the which no river serv's. But had he come in Winter time, he should have seene the Bridge (so great as it was) scarce able to receive so much water. But naturall Philosophers know full well, that both Welles and rivers according to the seasons, and the heat or cold, without or within do decrease or encrease accordingly. Whereupon in his returne he finding here durt for dust, and full currant water under the Bridge, recanted with these verses. Quae Tadcaster erat sine flumine, pulvere plena; Nunc habet immensum fluvium, & pro pulvere lutum. Somewhat higher Nid a muddy river runneth downe, The river Nid. well beset with woods on either side, out of the bottome of Craven hils, first by Niderdale, a vale unto which it giveth name: Rippley. and from thence carrieth his streame by Rippley a Mercate Towne, where the Inglebeys a Family of great antiquity, flourished in good reputation. Af∣terwards, with his deepe chanell hee fenseth Gnaresburg commonly called Knarsbo∣row Castle, Knarsborrow Castle. situate upon a most ragged and rough Rocke, whence also it hath the name: which, Serle de Burgh, Unkle by the fathers side to Eustace Vescy built, as the tradition holdeth: Afterward it became the seate of the Estoteviles, and now is coun∣ted part of the lands, belonging to the Dutchy of Lancaster. Under it there is a well, in which the waters spring not up out of the veines of the earth, but distill and trickle downe dropping from the rockes hanging over it, Dropping well. A Well turning wood into stone. whence they call it Dropping well: into which what wood soever is put, will in short space be covered over with a stony barke and turne into stone, as it hath beene often observed. In the Territory there by Liquirice groweth in great abundance, and a yellower and softer kinde of marle is there found, passing good to make the ground fertile. The Keeper or chiefe Ranger of the Forest adjoyning, was in times past one Gamell: whose posterity, of their ha∣bitation at Screven assumed the name of Screven: and from them descended the Slings∣bey, who received this Forestership of king Edward the First, and to this day live here in great and good regard. Nid having passed by these places not farre from Allerton, the seat of a very ancient and famous family of the Malliveries, who in old Deeds and Records are called Mali Leporarij, goeth on a little way, and then meeting Ouse, augmenteth the streame of Ouse by his confluence. As for Vre, he also springing out of these Westerne hilles, but on the other side of the Country, in North-Ricding, when by this name he hath watered the North part of the Shire, a little before he commeth to Rippon, serveth for the limite dividing the North and West Ridings one from another. This Rippon, in the Saxon tongue , being placed betweene Vre and Skell a rill, is beholden to religious Houses for all the dignity it had, and especially to a Monastery built in the primitive Church of the English-Saxons by Wilfride Archbishop of Yorke, and that with such arched and embowed Vaults, with such floorings and stories of stone-worke, with such turnings and windings in and out of Galleries (so saith William of Malmesbury ) that it was wonder∣full: Which, the Danes afterward, being so violent and outrageous that they spared neither God nor man, raced, together with the Towne. Yet flourished it againe, re∣paired by meanes of Odo Archbishop of Canterbury: who being a very great ma∣ster of ceremoniall mysteries, translated from hence to Canterbury the Reliques of Wilfride. But since the Normans arrivall, it prospered most, when the Castles as one saith, of Monkes beganne to bee built in greater number: For then both the Towne grew famous partly under the chiefe Magistrate, whom they call by an old Saxon word, Wakeman. Wakeman as one would say, Watchman, and partly by their industry in clothing which at this day is much diminished: and the Monastery likewise under the tuition and protection of the Archbishops of Yorke beganne marveilously to reflou∣rish. Besides, a very faire Church was there also built, at the charitable charges of the Noblemen and Gentry dwelling thereabout, and of their owne Treasurer: which with three high Spire-steeples doth welcome those that come to the towne, and did as it were emulate in workemanship, the wealthy Abbay of Fountaines, built within the sight of it by Thurstin Archbishop of Yorke. On the one side of this Church wee saw a little College of inging men, which Henry Bath Archbishop of Yorke erected: on the other side a very great mount of earth called Hilshow, cast up, as they report, Saint Wilfrides Needle. by the Danes. Within the Church, Saint Wilfrides Needle, was in our Grandfathers remembrance, very famous: A narrow hole this was, in the Crowdes or close vaulted roome under the ground, whereby womens honesty was tried: For, such as were chast did easily passe through, but as many as had plaied false, were miraculously, I know not how, held fast and could not creepe through. The Ab∣bay Fountaines aforesaid, most pleasantly seated in a right plentifull Country, and having Lead mines neere it, had the originall from twelve precise Monkes of Yorke, who fervently, zealous, to serve God in a more strict kinde of life, forsooke their cloi∣stures and addicted themselves to the ordinances of Saint Bernard. For whom, after they had reaped many Harvests of troubles, Thurstine Archbishop of Yorke built this Abbay, which was acknowledged an immediate daughter of Clarevalle, and in a few yeeres became a mother to many others, as Kirkstall, Salley, Meaux, &c. I have made more willingly mention of these, because Saint Bernard in his Epistles so highly approved their life, and discipline. Not farre beneath, there standeth by Vre a little Towne called Burrow bridge, of the bridge that is made over the River: which now is built very high and faire of stone worke, but in King Edward the Second his time, it seemeth to have beene of wood. For, wee reade, that when the Nobles of England disquieted the King and troubled the State, Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford in his going over it; was at a chinke thereof thrust through the body about his groine, by a souldier lying close under the Bridge. Neere unto this Bridge Westward, we saw in three divers little fields, foure huge stones, of Pyramidall forme, but very rudely wrought, set as it were in a streight and direct line. Pyramides. The two Pyramides in the middest whereof the one was lately pulled downe by some that hoped, though in vaine, to finde treasure, did almost touch one another: the uttermore stand not farre off, yet almost in equall distance from these on both sides. Of these I have nothing else to say, but that I am of opinion with some, that they were Monuments of victory erected by the Ro∣manes, hard by the High Street that went this way. For I willingly overpasse the fables of the common people, Divels bolts. who call them the Devils Bolts which they shot at ancient Cities and therewith overthrew them. Yet will not I passe over this, that very many and those learned men thinke they are not made of naturall stone indeed, but compounded of pure sand, lime, vitriol (whereof also they say there be certaine small graines within) and some unctuous matter. Of such a kinde there were in Rome cisternes, so firmely compact of very strong lime and sand, as Plinie writeth, that they seemed to be naturall stones. A little Eastward from this Bridge, Is-Urium. IS-URIUM BRIGANTUM an ancient City, so called of the River Vre running by it, flourished in ancient times, but was rased to the very ground many ages past. Neverthelesse the Village risen up neere the place, giveth testimony of the Antiquity thereof, for it is called Ealdburgh and Aldborrow. Aldborrow. i. Old Borrow. But, in that very plot of ground where the said City stood, are now ara∣ble grounds and pastures, so that scarce any footing thereof doth appeare. Surely, the very credite of Writers should have had much adoe to make us beleeve, that this had beene IS-URIUM, but that URE the Rivers name, the Romane Coine daily digged up, and the distance according to Antonines account betwixt this and Yorke, warranted it. For, by that Vre (which the Saxons afterward named Ouse be∣cause it hath entertained Ousburne a little River) is gone sixteene Italian miles from hence, Eboracum. Yorke. hee runneth through the City EBORACUM or EBURACUM, which Ptolomee in the second booke of his Great Construction calleth BRIGANTIUM (if the said booke bee not corrupted) because it was the chiefe City of the Brigantes. Ninnius calleth it Caer Ebrauc, the Britans Caer Effroc, the Saxons and , and we at this day, Yorke. The British History reporteth, that it tooke name of King Ebra c the Foun∣der: yet give mee leave to deeme conjecturally, without the prejudice to others that the name EB-URACUM is derived from nothing else but from the River Vre, so that it soundeth as much as by Vre, or along the side of Vre: for, even so the EB∣UROVICES in France, were seated by the River Eure, neere unto Eureux in Nor∣mandy: Semblably the EB-URONES in the Netherlands, neere unto the river Oure in the Dioecese of Lhuick: and EB-LANA in Ireland standeth hard by the river Lefny. This is the second City of England, the fairest in all this Country, and a sin∣gular safeguard and ornament both, to all the North parts. A pleasant place, large, and stately, well fortified, beautifully adorned as well with private as pulique buil∣dings, rich, populous, and to the greater dignity thereto it hath an Archiepiscopall See. Ure, which now is called Ouse, flowing with a gentle streame from the North part Southward cutteth it as I said in twaine, and divideth it, as it were, into two Cities, which are conjoyned with a stone Bridge, having the mightiest Arch one of them, that ever I saw. The West part, nothing so populous, is compassed in with a very faire Wall and the River together, fouresquarewise, and giveth entrance to those that come thither at one onely Gate, named Mikel Barre, as one would say, The great Gate. From which a long street and a broade, reacheth to the very Bridge, and the same streete beset with proper houses having gardens and orchards planted on the backeside on either hand, and behinde them fields even hard to the Walles, for exercise and di∣sports. In the South angle whereof which they and the River make betweene them, I saw a Mount, raised, as it seemeth, for some Castle to be built upon it, called The old Bale ; which, William Melton Archbishop, as wee reade in the Archbishops lives, strongly enclosed, first, with thicke planckes, eighteene foote long; afterward with a stone wall: yet there is nothing of all that, now to be seene. The East side wherein the houses stand very thicke and the streetes be narrower, in forme resembleth as it were a lentill, and is fortified also with very strong walles and on the South-East, Fosse-river. defended with the deepe chanell of Fosse a muddy River, which entring into the heart of the City by a blinde way, hath a Bridge over it, with houses standing upon it so close ranged one by another, that any man would judge it, to bee not a Bridge, but a continued streete; and so a little lower run∣neth into Ouse: where at their confluence, and meeting together, right over a∣gainst the Mount that I spake of, King William the Conquerour in a very conve∣nient place raised a most strong Castle to awe the Citizens. Upon which, time hath now a great while without impeachment wrought his will; ever since that Englishmen fell to neglect strong Holds, as receptacles for those whose hearts would not serve to fight in open field. On this side also toward the North-East, standeth the Cathedrall Church dedi∣cated to Saint Peter, an excellent faire Fabrique and a stately; neere unto which, without the Walles of the City, but yet enclosed within walles and by the River, flourished a renowned Abbay called Saint Maries, which Alan the Third, Earle of Little Britaine in Armorica and of Richmund, built and endowed with rich li∣vings: but now it is converted into the Princes house, and is commonly called The Manour. The Manour. Whence I should fetch the originall of Yorke but from the Romanes I cannot tell, seeing the Britans before the Romanes comming had no other Townes, than woods fensed with trenches and rampire, as Caesar and Strabo unreprovable Authors doe testifie. To say nothing therefore of King Ebrauk, whom some men both cu∣rious and credulous, as it should seeme, have imagined out of the name of Eboracum (for so is Yorke in Latine termed) to have beene the Founder thereof: most certaine it is, that the Sixth Legion Victrix, which Hadrian there Emperour brought out of Germany over into Britaine was placed heere in Garison. And that it was a Colo∣ny of the Romanes, it appeareth both by the authority of Ptolomee, and Antonine, and also by an ancient Inscription, which I saw in a certaine Aldermans house there in these words. M. VEREC. DIOGENES IIIII I VIR COL. EBOR. IDEMQ. MORT CIVES BITURIX. HAEC SIBI VIVUS FECIT. As also by a peece of money coined by the Emperour Severius, in the reverse whereof we reade. COL. EBORACUM. LEG. VI. VICTRIX. But how it is, That Victor whom Andre Scot set forth of late. that Victor in his History of the Caesars, hath called Yorke Municipi∣um or free towne of Britaine, being, as it was a Colony, I require farther time to de∣liberate thereupon, unlesse it were, that the inhabitants of Yorke, like as sometime the Praenestines did choose rather from a Colony to bee brought unto the state of a free-Burgh. For, Colonies having, as Agellius writeth, lawes, customes and rights at the will of the people of Rome and not at their owne pleasure, seemed more obnoxi∣ous, and their condition not so free: whereas free Cities, such as in Latin are named Municipia, used rights, Lawes and orders of their owne, and the Citizens or Bur∣gesses thereof were partakers with the people of Rome in their honourable Offices onely, and bound of necessity to nothing else. No mervaile therefore, if Colonies were changed into Free Burroughs. But to what end stand I upon this point? This difference of the name is not in the story of the Emperours so exactly observed, but that one and the selfe same place is called both a Colony, and a Municipium, or Free City. Severus▪ Howbeit out of that peece of money I dare not constantly affirme, that Seve∣rus first conducted and planted this Colony, seeing that Ptolomee and Antonine himselfe writeth it was the seat of the sixth Legion in the Antonines time. But we reade that Severus had his Palace in this City, and heere at the houre of death gave up his last breath with these words: I entred upon a state every where troublesome, and I leave it peaceable even to the Britans. His body was carried forth here to the funerall fire by the souldiers, after the military fashion, and committed to the flames, honoured with Justs and Turneaments of his souldiers and his owne sonnes, in a place beneath this City Westward neere to Ackham, where is to be seene a great Mount of earth raised up, which as Raulph Niger hath recorded, was in his time, of Severus, called Sivers. His ashes being bestowed in a little golden pot, or vessell of the Porphyrite stone, were carried to Rome, and shrined there in the Monument of the Antonines. At which time there was in this City the Temple of Goddesse Bellona. The Temple of Bellona. For, Spartianus speaking of Severus and this very City, saith thus, When Severus returned and came into the City, purposing to offer sacrifice, he was led first of all to the Temple of Bellona, by the errour of a rusticall Augur or Soothsaying Priest. At which time the Tribunal or Justice Haul of this City was in this respect most happy, because therein sat to minister ju∣stice that Oracle of the law, Aemelius Paulus Papinianus, as Forcatulus witnesseth. And from this place it was, for certaine, that Severus and Antoninus Emperours be∣ing consulted in a case or question of Right, gave forth their Imperiall constitution De rei Vindicatione. L.I.C. Constantius An hundred yeeres or thereabout after the death of Severus, Fl. Valerius Constantius sirnamed Chlorus, an Emperour surpassing in all vertue and Christian piety, who came hether When the Gods, as the Panegyrist saith, called him now to the inmost entry and doore of the earth, ended his life also in this City and was deified, as we may see by ancient Coines. And albeit Florilegus recordeth, that his Tombe was found in Wales, as I have said; yet men of credite have enformed me, that in our fathers remembrance, when Abbaies were suppressed and pulled downe, in a certaine Vault or crowdes or a little Chappell under the ground wherein Con∣stantius was supposed to have beene buried, there was found a Lampe burning: for, Lazius writeth, that in ancient time they preserved light in Sepulchres, by resolving gold artificially into a liquid and fatty substance, which should continue burning a long time and for many ages together. This Emperor begat of his former wife Helena CONSTANTINE THE GREAT, Constantine the Great. THE DELIVERER OF ROME CITY, as ancient inscriptions give testimony, THE FOUNDER OF PEACE, AND THE REPAIRER OF THE COMMON VVEALTH: Who was present in Yorke at his fathers last gaspe, and forthwith pro∣claimed Emperour, The souldiers, as the Panegyricall Oratour saith, regarding rather the good of the State, than private affections, cast the purple robe upon him, whiles hee wept and put spurs to his horse, to avoid the importunity of the Army attempting and requiring so in∣stantly to make him Emperour: But the happinesse of the State overcame his modestie. Whence it is that the Author of the Panegyricall oration crieth out in these words, O fortunate Britaine and now blessed above all lands, which first sawest Constantine Emperor. Hence it may be gathered, in what, and how great estimation Yorke was in those daies, seeing the Romane Emperours Court was there held. For, our owne Coun∣try Writers record, that this City was by Constantius adorned and graced with an Episcopall See: But yet, that Ta rinus the Martyr Bishop of Eureux sat heere and governed, Vincentii Spe∣culum histori∣ale. I will not say as others doe. For, Vincentius out of whom they sucked this errour, would by his owne words convince me of untruth. But when the Romanes were departed and had left Britaine for a prey to barbarous Nations, this City sore afflicted with many calamities, suffered her part also of miseries, and was little or nothing better about the end of the Scottish or Saxons Warres, than a poore small shadow of a great name. For, when Paulinus preached Christian Religion to the Eng∣lish Saxons in this Country, it lay so desolate, that there remained not so much as a Chappell in it, for King Edwin to bee baptized in. Who in the yeere after Christs Birth 627. built a little Oratory of wood: and when as afterward he went in hand with building a greater Church of stone, scarce had he laid the foundation thereof, when he was prevented by death and left it to be finished by his Successour Oswald. Ever since that time, Scotland in times past, subject to the Archbishop of Yorke. the Ecclesiasticall Dignity in this Church encreased, and by a Pall sent unto it from Honorius the Pope, became a Metropolitane City; which beside twelve Bishoprickes in England, exercised the power of a Primate over all the Bishops of Scotland. But many yeeres since, Scotland withdrew it selfe from this her Metropolitane: and the Metropolitane City it selfe hath so devoured o∣ther Bishoprickes adjoyning, being but little to say truth and of small account, that it hath now but foure within the owne Dioecese, namely, the Bishoprickes of Dur∣rham, of Chester, of Carlile, and of Man, or Sodorensis in the Isle of Man. And the Archbishop Egbert, who flourished about the yeere of our Salvation 740. erected at Yorke, See in Scot∣land. A Library. Flaccus Alc∣winus or Al∣binus flouri∣shed. anno. 780. A most famous Library, the Cabinet as I may so terme it (these be the words of William of Malmesbury ) and Closet of all liberall Arts. Touching which Library, Alcwin of Yorke Schoolemaster to Charles the Great, first Founder of the Univer∣sity of Paris, and the onely Honour of this City, in an Epistle to the said Charles wrote thus. Give mee the bookes of deeper and more exquisite scholasticall learning, such as I had in mine owne Country by the good and most devout industry of the Archbishop Egbert. And if it please your wisedome, I will send backe some of your owne servants, who may exemplifie out of them all those things that be necessary, and bring the floures of Britaine into France, that there may not be a Garden of learning enclosed onely within Yorke walles; but that streames of Paradise may be also at Towres. Then also it was that Princes bestowed many and great livings and lands upon the Church of Yorke, especially Ulphus the sonne of Toral (I note so much out of an old booke, that there may plainly appeare a custome of our ancestour in endowing Churches with livings). This Ulphus aforesaid ruled in the West part of Deira, and by reason of the debate that was like to arise betweene his sonnes the elder and the younger, about their Lordships and Signiories after his death, forthwith hee made them all alike. For, without delay hee went to Yorke, tooke the horne with him out of which hee was wont to drinke, filled it with wine, and before the Altar of God and blessed Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles, kneeling upon his knees he dranke, and thereby enfeoffed them in all his lands and re∣venewes. Which horne was there kept as a monument (as I have heard) untill our fathers daies. I might seeme to speake in derogation of the Clergy, if I should report what se∣cret heart-burnings, or rather open enmities flashed out betweene the Archbi∣shops of Yorke and of Canterbury upon worldly ambition; whiles with great wast of their wealth, but more losse of their credite and reputation, they bickered most eagerly about the Primacy. For, the Church of Yorke, as he writeth, ( inferiour though it were unto that of Canterbury in riches ) yet being equall in dignity, albeit of later time founded: and advanced on high with the same power that Canterbury hath, confirmed also with the like authority of Apostolicall Priviledges, tooke it ill to bee subject unto that of Canterbury by vertue of a Decree of Alexander of Rome, who ordained, That the Church of Yorke ought to be subject unto Canterbury, and in all things to obey the constitutions of the Archbishop thereof, as Primate of all Britaine, in such matters as appertaine to Christian Religion. Concerning the Archbishops of Yorke, it is no part verily of my purpose to write any thing heere, although there bee very many of them who deserve for their vertue and piety to bee renowned. Let it suffice to note in a word, that from Paulinus the first Archbishop, consecrated in the yeere of our Redemption 625. there have sitten in that See threescore and five Archbishops, unto the yeere 1606. in which D. Tobie Matthew a most reverend Prelate, The sixty six Archbishop. for the ornaments of vertue and piety, for learned eloquence, and continuall exercise of teaching, was translated hither from the Bishopricke of Durrham. This City for a time flourished very notably under the English Saxons domini∣on, untill the Danes like a mighty storme thundring from out of the North-East, de∣faced it againe with merveilous great ruines, and by killing and slaying disteined it with bloud, which, that Alcuine aforesaid in his Epistle to Egelred King of North∣umberland may seeme to have presaged before What signifieth (saith he) that raining of bloud which in Lent we saw at Yorke the head City of the whole Kingdome, in Saint Pe∣ters Church, to fall downe violently in threatning wise from the top of the roufe, in the North part of the house, and that in a faire day. May it not bee thought, that bloud is com∣ming upon the Land from the North parts? Verily soone after it was embrued with bloud, and did pine away with most miserable calamities, when the Danes spoiled, wasted, and murrhered all where ever they came. And verily in the yeere 867. the wals were so battered and shaken by reason of continuall Warres, that Osbright and Ella Kings of Northumberland, whiles they pursewed the Danes easily brake into the City: who being both of them slaine in a most bloudy battaile in the very middest of the City, left the victory unto the Danes. Whereupon William of Malmesbury writeth in this manner, Yorke, alwaies exposed first to the rage of the Northren Nations, sustained the barbarous assaults of the Danes, and groaned being pitteously shaken with mani∣fold ruines. But as the very same Authour witnesseth, King Athelstone wonne it per∣force out of the Danes hands, and overthrew the Castle quite, which they had heere fortified. Neither for all this, was it altogether free from warres in the times next ensuing whiles that age ranne fatall for the destruction of Cities. But the Normans as they ended these miseries, so they made almost a finall hand of Yorke also. For, when the sonnes of Sueno the Dane had landed in these parts with a Danish Fleete of 240. Alfred of B verley, in t Library of Lord Burg Treasurer England. Saile, the Normans lying in Garison, who kept two Forts within the City, fearing least the houses in the Suburbes might stand the enemy in stead to fill up the Ditches withall, set them on fire: but by reason the winde rose highly, the fire was so carried and spred throughout that City, that now it was set a burning, when the Danes breaking in upon them made pitifull slaughter in every place, having put the Normans to the sword, and keeping alive William Mallet and Gilbert Gant two principall persons, that they might be tithed with the souldiers. For, Decimatio Execution very tenth every tenth man of the Normans they chose out by lot, to be executed. Where∣upon King William the Conquerour was so incensed with desire of revenge, that he shewed his cruelty upon the Citizens by putting them all to death, as if they had ta∣ken part with the Danes: and upon the City it selfe by setting it on fire afresh; and as William of Malmesbury saith, Hee so depopulated and defaced the Villages adjoyning, and the sinewes of that fertile Region were so cut by the spoiles there committed and booties raised, and the ground for the space of threescore miles lay so untilled, that if a stranger had then seene the Cities that in times were of high account, the Towres which with their lofty toppes threatned the skie, and the fields that were rich in pastures, hee could not but sigh and la∣ment, yea and if an ancient inhabitant had beheld the same, hee could not have knowne them. How great Yorke had beene aforetime, Domesday booke shall tell you in these words. In King Edward the Confessours time, there were in Yorke City sixe Divisions or Shires, besides that of the Archbishops. One was laid waste, for the Castles or Forts. In the five Divisions were 1428. dwelling Mansions to give entertainement: And, in the Archbishops Shire or Division 200. dwelling Mansions likewise. After these woefull overthrowes our countryman Necham thus versified of it. Visito quam foelix Ebrancus condidit urbem, Petro se debet pontificalis apex. Civibus hac toties viduata, novísque repleta, Diruta prospexit moenia saepe sua. Quid manus hostilis queat, est experta frequenter, Sed quid? nunc pacis otia longa fovent. The City that Great Ebrauk built, I come now for to view, Whereof the See pontificall, is to Saint Peter due. This, many times laid desolate, and peopled new hath beene, Her wals cast downe and ruinate full often hath it seene. What mischiefe hostile hands could worke, not once nor twice it found, What then? since now, long time of peace, doth keepe it safe and sound. For, in his time, when after these troublesome stormes a most pleasant calme of peace presently ensued, it rose of it selfe againe and flourished afresh, although the Scots and Rebels both, did oftentimes make full account to destroy it. But under the Raigne of King Stephen, it caught exceeding great harme by casualty of fire, wherein were consumed the Cathedrall Church, the Abbay of Saint Mary and o∣ther religious houses: yea and that noble and most furnished Library (as it is thought) which Alcuin hath recorded to have been founded by Archbishop Egeldred his Prae∣ceptour. As for the Abbay of Saint Mary it quickly recovered the former dignity by new buildings: but the Cathedrall Church lay longer ere it held up head againe, and not before King Edward the First his time: For then, John Roman Treasurer of the Church laid the foundation of a new worke, which his sonne John, William Mel∣ton, and John Thoresby, all of them Archbishops, brought by little and little to that perfection and beauty which now it sheweth, yet not without the helping hand of the Nobility and Gentry thereabout, especially of the Percies and the Vavasours, which the armes of their houses standing in the very Church, and their images at the West gate of the Church doe shew, Percies pourtraied with a peece of timber, and Vavasours with a stone in their hands, for that the one supplied the stone, the other the timber for this new building. This Church as he reporteth who wrote the life of Aeneas Sylvius, Commentar▪ of Pope Pius. Lib. prim. who was Pope Pius the second, and that upon the Popes owne relati∣on, For workmanship and greatnesse, is memorable over all the world, and the Chappell most lightsome, the glasse-windowes whereof are fast bound betweene pillars that bee most slender in the mids. This Chappell is that most dainty and beautifull Chapter-house, in which this verse stands painted in golden letters. Ut Rosa flos florum, sic est Domus ista Domorum. The floure of floures, a Rose men call: So is this house of housen all. About the same time also, the Citizens fensed the City round about with new walles and many towres and bulwarkes set orderly in divers places, yea and ordained very good and holsome lawes for the governement thereof. King Richard the Se∣cond granted it to bee a County incorporate by it selfe, and King Richard the Third beganne to repaire the Castle. And that nothing might be wanting, King Henry the Eighth within the memory of our fathers, The Councell established in the North. appointed heere a Councell not unlike to the Parliaments in France, for to decide and determine the causes and controver∣sies of these North parts according to equity and conscience, which consisteth of a Lord President, certaine Counsellers at the Princes pleasure, a Secretary and under Officers. As touching the Longitude of Yorke our Mathematicians have described it to be two and twenty Degrees and twenty five Scruples: the Latitude 54. degrees and 10. scruples. Hitherto have we treated of the West part of this shire and of Yorke City, which is reckoned neither in the one part, nor the other, but enjoyeth peculiar liberties, and hath jurisdiction over the Territory adjoyning on the West side. Which they call the Liberty of Ansty, others the Ancienty of the Antiquity, but other have derived it very probably from the Dutch word Anstossen, which betokeneth limits. And now for a conclusion have heere what Master John Jonston of Aberden hath but a while since written in verse, of Yorke. Praesidet extremis Arctoae finibus orae Urbs vetus, in veteri facta subinde nova. Romanis Aquilis quondam Ducibúsque superba. Quam post barbarica diripuere manus. Pictus atrox, Scotus, Danus, Normannus, & Anglus Fulmina in hanc Martis detonuere sui. Post diras rerum clades, tótque aspera fata, Blandiùs aspirans aura serena subit. LONDINUM caput est, & regni urbs prima Britanni: EBORACUM à primâ jure secunda venit. In parts remote of Northren tract, there stands as soveraine, A City old, but yet of old eftsoones made new againe. Whilom of Romane Legions and Captaines proud it was: But since by forces barbarous sacked and spoil'd, alasse. The Picts so fierce, the Scots and Danes, Normans and Englishmen, 'Gainst it their bolts of dreadfull war have thundred now and then. Yet after sundry bitter blasts, and many a cursed clap, A milder gale of peacefull daies, hath brought it better hap. Of British Kingdome LONDON is chiefe seat and principall, And unto it there goes by right Yorke City next of all. Ouse now leaving Yorke, being otherwhiles disquieted and troubled with that whirling encounter of contrary waters, and forceable eddies which some call Higra, runneth downe through Bishops Thorpe, Bishops Thorpe. called Saint Andrewes Thorpe, before that Walter Grey Archbishop of Yorke purchased it with ready money, and to prevent the Kings Officers who are wont rigorously to seize upon Bishops Temporalties when the See is vacant, gave it to the Deane and Chapter of Yorke, with this con∣dition, that they should alwayes yeeld it to his Successours. Of whom, Richard Le Sicrope Archbishop of Yorke, a man of a firy spirit, and ready to entertaine rebellion, was condemned in this very place, of high Treason by King Henry the Fourth, a∣gainst whom he had raised an insurrection. Cawood. Afterward Cawood a Castle of the Arch∣bishops standeth upon the same River, which King Athelstan, as I have read, gave unto the Church: Just against which on the other side of the River lyeth Ricall, where Harald Haardread arrived with a great Fleet of Danes. Then Ouse passeth hard by Selby a little Towne, well peopled and of good resort; where King Henry the First was borne, and where his father King William the First built a faire Abbay in memory of Saint German, who happily confuted that venemous Pelagian Here∣sie, which oftentimes (as the Serpent Hydra ) grew to an head againe in Britaine. The Abbats of this Church, as also of Saint Maries in Yorke, were the onely Ab∣bats in the North parts that had place in the Parliament house. And so Ouse at length speedeth away to Humber, leaving first Escricke a seat of the Lascelles sometimes to be remembred for that King James advanced Sir Thomas Knivet the owner thereof Lord Knivet to the honour of Baron Knivet of Escricke, L. Knivet. in the yeere 1607. And afterward passing by Drax, a little Village famous long since for a Monastery foun∣ded there by Sir William Painell, and whereas William of Newburgh writeth, Philip of Tollevilla had a Castle most strongly fensed, with Rivers, Woods, and Marishes about it, which he, confident upon the courage of his followers, and his provision of victuals and armour, defended against King Stephen ; untill it was wonne by assault. EBORACENSIS Comitatus (ovius Incolae olin Bri∣gantes appellabantur) pars Orien∣talis, vulgo EAST RI∣DING EAST-RIDING. E AST-RIDING the second part of this Region, wherein Pto∣lomee placed the PARISI, lyeth Eastward from Yorke. On the North side and the West, it is bounded with the River East-riding. Darwent, that runneth downe with a winding course: on the South with the Salt water of Humber, and on the East with the German Ocean. Upon the Sea side and along Dar∣went the Soile is meetly good and fertile: But in the mids it is nothing else but an heape of Hilles rising up on high, which they call Yorkes wold. Darwent springing not farre from the shore, first taketh his way Westward: then, hee windeth into the South by Aiton and Malton ; whereof, because they belong to the North part of the Shire, I will speake in due place. No sooner is hee entred into this Quarter, but downe hee runneth not farre from the ruines of the old Castle Montferrant. Montferrant Historie of Meaux. The Lords whereof were in times past the Fossards, men of noble parentage and wealthy withall: But when William Fossard Ward to the King, being committed unto William le Grosse Earle of Aumarle as to his Guardian, and now come to his yeeres, abused his sister; the Earle in wreck∣full displeasure for this fact of his, laid this Castle even with the ground, and forced the young Gentleman to forsake his Country. Howbeit, after the Earles death, he recovered his inheritance againe, and left one onely daughter behinde him: who being marryed unto R. de Torneham, bare a daughter marryed to Peter de de Malolacu. Mauley: whose heires and successours being bettered in their estate by this inheritance of the Fossards, became great and honourable Barons. Not farre from hence is situate up∣on the River side, Kirkham, as one would say of Church-place: For, a Priory of Chanons was there founded by Walter Espec a man of high place and calling, by whose daughter a great estate accrewed to the family of the Lord Rosses. Then, but somewhat lower, Darwent had a City of his owne name, which Antonine the Em∣perour calleth DERVENTIO, and placeth it seven miles from YORKE. The booke of Notices maketh mention of a Captaine over the Company Derventiensis under the Generall of Britaine, that resided in it; and in the Saxons Empire it see∣meth to have beene that Towne, where the King used to lye, which Bede saith, was situate neere unto the River Doroventio. In which, as hee also writeth, Eumer, that murderous Villaine thrust at Edwin King of Northumberland with a sword and had runne him through, but that one of his men stepped betweene, and saved the Kings life with the losse of his owne. Yet could I never have said precisely which was the ve∣ry place, had not that most judicious Robert Marshall given me a light thereof. For, he gave me to understand, that just at the very same distance from Yorke which I spake of, there stands hard upon the River Darwent, a little Towne named Auldby, that is, if you interprete the Saxon word, The old Habitation: where, are extant yet in sight some tokens of Antiquity, and upon a very high Hill neere unto the River, the rubbish of an ancient Fortification, so that it cannot chuse, but to have beene the said City Derventio. From hence glideth the River hard under Stanford-Bridge, which also of the battaile there fought is called Battlebridge. Battlebridge. For, at that Bridge, Harald King of England, after a great execution done upon the Danes flew in a pight field Harald Hardread King of Norway, who with a Fleet of 200. saile grie∣vously annoyed the Isle of Britaine, and was now landed at Richall, spoiling and wasting all in his way. The King of England who having the honour of the field, found among the spoiles such a masse of Gold, as that twelve lusty young men, had much adoe to carry it on their backes, as Adam Bremensis recordeth. This field was foughten scarce nine dayes before the arrivall of William Conquerour, what time the dissolute and roiotous life of the Englishmen, seemed to foretell their imminent overthrow and destruction. But of this I have spoken before. Derwent, which when it is encreased with raine, and as it were provoked to anger doth oftentimes contemne his bankes and surround the medowes lying about it, passing from hence by Wreshil a proper and a strong Castle, which Sir Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester built, runneth amaine under Babthorpe, which yeeldeth both name and habitation to a worshipfull Family of Knights degree: and so at length dischargeth himselfe into Ouse. Out of this stocke it was (for let us not thinke much to tell of those who performed faithfull service to their Prince and Country) that both father and sonne fighting together under the banner of King Henry the Sixth lost their lives in the Battaile of Saint Albans, and were there buryed together with this Epitaph: Cum patre Radulpho Babthorp jacet ecce Radulphus Filius, hoc duro marmore pressus humo, Henrici Sexti dapifer, pater Armiger ejus, Mors satis id docuit, fidus uterque fuit. &c. Behold where two Raulph Babthorps, both the sonne and father lye, Under a stone of marble hard, interr'd in this mould dry: To Henry the Sixth the father Squire, the Sonne he Sewer was, Both true to Prince, and for his sake they both their life did passe. Howden. And now Ouse by this time carrying a fuller streame, runneth neere Howden a Mercate Towne, famous not so much for any beauty in it, or great resort thereto, as because it hath given name to a little Territory adjoyning, called of it Howdenshire, and had therein not long since a prety Collegiat Church of five Prebendaries: unto which joyneth the Bishops house of Durrham who have great lands thereabout. One of which, namely Walter Skirlaw, who flourished about the yeere of our Lord 1390. as we reade in the booke of Durrham, built a very great and large steeple to this Church, that if there happened by chance any inundation, it might serve the inhabitants for a place of refuge to save themselves in. Metham. And not farre from hence stands Metham, which gave both sirname and habitation also to the ancient house of the Methams. Now the River Ouse being very broad, swift and roring besides, out powreth his streame into the Frith or salt water ABUS: Abus. Humber . For so calleth Ptolomee that arme of the Sea, which the English Saxons and we tearme Humber, whereof also the Country beyond it, by a generall name was called Northumberland. Both these names may seeme to have beene drawne with some little change, from the British word Aber, which among them signifieth the mouth of a River: and I would thinke it was impo∣sed upon this River by way of excellency: because Ure or Ouse having entertained and lodged many Rivers, carryeth them all with him along into this, yea and other Rivers of right great name are emptied into it. And verily it is one of the broadest armes of the sea and best stored with fish in all Britaine. It riseth high as the Ocean, at every tide floweth, and when the same ebbeth and returneth backe, it carryeth his owne streame and the currant of the Sea together most forcibly and with a mighty noise, not without great danger of such as saile therein, whence Necham writeth thus of it. Fluctibus aequoreis nautis suspectior Humber, Dedignans Urbes visere rura colit. More fear'd of shipmen Humber streame, than waves of sea so deepe; Disdaining cities great to see, neere country townes doth keepe. And following the British History, as if it had beene so called of a King of the Hunnes, he addeth this moreover. Hunnorum princeps ostendens terga Locrino Submersus, nomen contulit Humbris aquae. A Prince of Hunnes, whiles that he shew'd his backe to Locrine brave, Was drowned heere, and so the name, to Humber water gave. Touching whom, another Poet also: Dum fugit, obstat ei flumen, submergitur illic; Dèque suo tribuit nomine nomen aquae. Whiles he turn'd backe, and tooke his flight, the River stopt the same, There drown'd was he, and then of him the water tooke the name. Neither were there indeed any Cities seene to stand by this Arme of the Sea in Nechams daies: but before and after, there flourished one or two Cities in these places. Under the Roman Empire, not farre from the banke, by Foulnesse a River of small account, where Wighton a little Towne of Husbandry well inhabited is now seene, stood, as we may well thinke, in old time DELGOVITIA: and that I may not take hold of the distance from DERVENTIO for a proofe, both the resem∣blance, and the signification also of the name, doe concurre. For, Delgwe in the Bri∣tish tongue signifieth The Statues or Images of the Heathen Gods, and in a small Village adjoyning to this little Towne, there was a Temple of Idols even in the Saxons time, of exceeding great name, and request: which, of those Heathen gods was then termed Godmundingham, Bede. and now is called in the same sense Gods Church or habitation. Godmanham. Nei∣ther doubt I, but that even when the Britans flourished, it was some famous Oracle much frequented when superstition spread, and swaying among all Nations had whol∣ly possessed the weake mindes of ignorant people. But when Paulinus preached Christ, unto Northumberland men, Coy-fi, who had beene a Pontife or Bishop of the heathen rites and ceremonies, after he had once embraced Christian Religion, First of all profaned this Temple, the very habitation of impiety, by launcing a speare against it, yea he destroyed it, and as Bede writeth, Set it on fire, with all the enclosures and Isles belonging unto it. From hence, something more Eastward, the River Hull bendeth his course to Humber, Drifeild. which River hath his spring head neere unto Drif∣feild, a Village well knowne, by reason of the Tombe of Alfred that most learned King of Northumberland; and the mounts that be raised heere and there about it. The said River hasteneth thitherward, not farre from Leckenfielde, an house of the Per∣cies Earles of Northumberland: neere unto which, standeth the dwelling place of a very famous and ancient Progeny of the Hothams at Schorburg ; together with the rubbish of an old Castle of Peter Mauley at Garthum. And now approcheth the Ri∣ver Hull neerer unto Beverley, Beverley. in the English Saxon tongue called , which Bede seemeth to name, the Monastery in Deirwand, that is, In the word of the Deiri, a great Towne, very populous and full of trade. A man would guesse it by the name and situation to be PETUARIA PARISIORUM, Betnatia. although it affordeth nothing of greater antiquity, than that John sirnamed de Beverley, Archbishop of Yorke, a man as Bede witnesseth, both godly and learned, after he had given over his Bishop∣ricke, as weary of this world, came hither, and ended his life in contemplation, about the yeere of our Redemption 721. The life of John of Bever∣ley. The Kings held the memoriall of this John so sacred and reverend, especially King Athelstan who honoured him as his tutelar Saint, after he had put the Danes to flight, that they endowed this place with many and those very great priviledges, Pat. 5. H. 4. and Athelstane granted them liberties in these ge∣nerall words, All's free make I thee, as heart may thinke, or eye may see. Yea and there was granted unto it the priviledges of a Sanctuary, so that bankrupts and men suspe∣cted of any capitall crime worthy of death, might bee free and safe there from dan∣ger of the Law. In which there was erected a Chaire of stone with this Inscription. HAEC SEDES LAPIDEA Freedstoll DICITUR .i. PACIS CATHEDRA, AD QUAM REUS FUGIENDO PERVE∣NIENS OMNIMODAM HABET SECURITATEM. That is, This seat of Stone is called Freedstooll, that is, The chaire of Peace, unto which what Offender soever flieth and commeth, hath all manner of security. Heereby, the Towne grew great, and daily there flocked hither a number to dwell as inmates; and the Townesmen for conveyance of commodities by sea made a cha∣nell for a water course out of the River Hull sufficient to carry boats and barges. Hull river. For the chiefe Magistracy there, it had twelve Wardens; afterwards Governours and Wardens. And now, by the gracious grant of Queene Elizabeth, a Major and Go∣vernours. More Eastward, The Register of Meaux Abbay. there flourished Meaux Abbay, so called of one Gamell borne at Meaux in France, who obtained it at William the Conquerours hands for a place to dwell in: and heere was founded an Abbay for the Monkes of the Cluni∣acke order by William Le Grosse Earle of Aulbemarle, to bee released of his vow that hee had made to visite Jerusalem. A little lower runneth out in a great length Cot∣tingham, a country Towne of husbandry, Cottingham. where by licence granted from King John, Robert Estotevill the Lord thereof built a Castle now utterly fallen to ruine. Estotevill. Which Robert, was descended from Robert Grondebeofe, or Grandebeofe a Baron of Norman∣dy, and a man of great name and reputation: whose inheritance fell by marriage to the Lord de Wake, Wake. and by a daughter of John de Wake it came to Edmund Earle of Kent, who had a daughter named Joane wife unto that most warlique Knight Ed∣ward Prince of Wales, who so often victoriously vanquished the French in divers places. The River Hull aforesaid, after it hath passed sixe miles from hence shed∣deth himselfe into Humber, and neere unto his mouth hath a Towne of his owne name called Kingston upon Hull, Kingston upon Hull. but commonly Hull. This Towne fetcheth the be∣ginning from no great antiquity: For, King Edward the First, who in regard of his Princely vertues deserveth to bee ranged among the principall and best Kings that ever were, Placit. Anno. 44. Edw. 3. Ebo . 24. having well viewed and considered the opportunity of the place which before time was called Wike, had it by right of exchange from the Abbat of Meaux, and in lieu of the Pro Vaccariis & Beycariis. Beasts stals and sheepe pastures, as I conceive it, which there he found, built a Towne that he named Kingston, as one would say, The Kings Towne; and there, as wee reade in the Records of the Kingdome, hee made an haven and free Burgh, the Inhabitants thereof also, free Burgesses, and he granted divers liberties unto them. And by little and little it rose to that dignity, that for stately and sumptuous buil∣dings, for strong block-houses, for well furnished ships, for store of Merchants and a∣bundance of all things it is become now the most famous towne of merchandise in these parts. All which the inhabitants ascribe partly to Michael de la-Pole, who ob∣tained their priviledges for them, after that King Richard the Second had promoted him to the honour of Earle of Suffolke, and partly their gainfull trade by Island fish dried and hardened which they tearme Stockfish: whereby they gathered a maine masse of riches. Hence it came to passe, that within a little while, they fensed their City with a bricke wall, strengthened it with many Towres and Bulwarkes, where it is not defended with the river: and brought such a deale of coblestones for ballais to their ships, that therewith they have paved all the quarters and streets of the towne most beautifully. For the chiefe Magistrate it had (as I have beene enformed) first a Warden or Custos: then Bailives, afterward a Major and Bailives: and in the end they obtained of K. Henry the Sixth that they might have a Major and a Sheriffe, and that the very towne should be a County, as our lawyers use to say incorporate by it selfe. Nei∣ther will I thinke it much to note, although in Barbarous tearmes, out of the booke of Meaux Abbay, De la Pole. as touching the Major of this City. William De la Pole knight, was beforetime a merchant at Ravens-rod, skilfull in merchandise and inferiour to no English merchant whatsoever. He making his aboade afterwards at Kingston upon Hull, was the first Major that ever the said towne had: he began also and founded the monastery of Saint Mi∣chael hard by the said King-ston, which now is an house of the Carthusian or Charter-house monkes. And he had for his eldest sonne Sir Michael De la Pole Earle of Suffolke, who caused the said Monasterie to bee inhabited by Carthusian Monkes. And verily William De la Pole aforesaid, lent many thousand pounds of gold unto King Edward, whiles hee made his aboade at Antwerp in Brabant, wherefore the King in recompence of the said gold, made him Lord chiefe Baron of his Exchequer, conferred upon him the whole Seignorie or Lordship of Holdernes, together with other lands belonging unto the Crown; and that by the Kings Char∣ter, yea and ordained that he should be reputed a Baneret. Yet if any man make doubt here∣of, the Recordes I hope may satisfie him fully, Cl. 5. E.R. 3. M. 28. Valectus or Valettus. I. Tisius. in which William De la Pole is in plaine tearmes called Dilectus Valectus, et Mercator noster, that is, Our wellbeloved Valect and our Merchant: now, Valect, to tell you once for all, was in those daies an honorable ti∣tle as well in France as in England: but afterward applied unto servants and gromes: whereupon when the Gentry rejected it, by changing the name they began to bee called Gentlemen of the Bedchamber. From Hull, Ocellum. Holdernesse. a Promontorie runneth on forward and shooteth out a farre into the sea, which Ptolomee calleth OCELLVM, wee Holdernesse, and a certaine monke, Cavam Deiram, as it were, the hollow Country of the Deirians, in the same significati∣on that Coelosyria is so tearmed, as one would say Holow Syria. In this Promontory, the first towne wee meet with in the winding shore is Headon, Headon. in times past (if wee list to beleeve fame that useth to amplifie the truth, and which for my part I will not discredit) risen to exceeding great account by the industry of merchants and sea-faring men: from which (so uncertaine is the condition as well of places as of people) it is so much fallen by the vicinity of Hull, and the choaking up of the haven which hath empoverished it, that it can shew scarce any whit of the ancient state it had. Although King Iohn granted unto Baldwin Earle of Aulbemarle and of Hol∣dernesse, and to his wife Hawis, free Burgage heere, so that the Burgers might hold in free Burgage, with those customes that Yorke and Nichol, that is, Lincolne. Yet now it beginneth by little and little to revive againe, in hope to recover the former dignity. There standeth hard by the Pomontorie, Praetorium. Patrington. an ancient towne, which Antonine the Emperour called PRAETORIVM, but we in our age Patrington, like as the Italians have changed the name of a towne sometime called Praetorium, into Petrovina. That I doe not mistake herein, both the distance from DELGOVITIA, and the very name yet remaining doth prove: which also in some sort implieth, that this is the very same that in Ptolomees copies is written PETVARIA corruptly, for Praetorium. But whether this name were given it, either from Praetorium, that is, the hall of Justice, or from some large and stately house, such as the Romans tearmed Praetoria, it doth not appeare for certaine. The inhabitants glorie much yet as touching their Anti∣quity and the commodiousnesse of the haven in ancient times: and they may as well glorie for the pleasantnesse thereof. For, it hath a most delectable pro∣spect: on the one side lieth the maine sea brimme upon it, on the other Humber a famous arme of the sea; and over against it the fresh and greene skirtes of Lin∣coln-shire. The high way of the Romans from the Picts wall which Antonine the Emperor followed, here endeth. For, Ulpian hath written, that such high waies commonly end at the sea, at rivers, or at Cities. Somewhat lower standeth Winsted, the habitation of the Hildeards knights of an∣cient descent: and higher into the Country, Rosse : from whence the honorable fami∣ly of the Barons Rosse tooke their name, Winsted. Barons de Rosse. like as they were seated there in times past: and hard by the sea-side, Grimstons-garth: where the Grimstons for a long time have lived in good reputation: and a little from hence standeth Rise, the mansion house in old time of certaine noble men bearing the name of Falconberg. And then, in the very necke of the promontorie, where it draweth in most narrow into a sharpe point, Ravenspur and Ravens-burg. Kelnsey. and is called Spurnhead, is KELNSEY a little village: which plainely sheweth that this is the very OCELLVM mentioned by Ptolomee : for, as from OCEL∣LVM Kelnsey is derived: so Ocellum doubtlesse, was made of Y-kill, which as I have said before signifieth in the British tongue a Promontory or narrow necke of land. From Spurn-head, the shore withdraweth it selfe backe by little and little, and gently bending inward shooteth Northward by Overthorne and Witherensey two lit∣tle Churches, Sisters Kirkes. Constable. called of the sisters that built them Sisters kirks : and not farre from Constable-Burton, so called of the Lords thereof, who being by marriages linked to right honorable houses, flourish at this day in great worship: and out of which fa∣milie Robert (as wee read in the booke of the Abbay of Meaux ) was one of the Earle of Aulbemarls knights, who being aged and full of daies took upon him the Crosse and went with King Richard in his voiage toward the holy land. Then, by Skipsey, which Dru the first Lord of Holdernesse fortified with a Castle. When the shore beginneth to spread againe and beare out into the sea, it maketh roome for a bay or creeke, that Ptolomee calleth EYAIMENON GABRANTO VICORUM, which the Latin Interpreters have translated, some PORTUOSVM SINVM, that is, the barbo∣rous Creeke ; Sinus salutari . Suerby. others, SALVTAREM, that is, the safe Creeke. But neither of them both better expresseth the nature of the Greeke word, than the very name of a little vil∣lage in the nouke thereof, which wee call Sureby. For, that which is safe and sure from danger, the Britans and French men both, terme Seur, as wee Englishmen ( sure ) who peradventure did borrow this word from the Britans. There is no cause therefore, why we should doubt, but that this creeke was that very EYAIMENON of the GABRANTOVICI, Gabrantovici. who dwelt there abouts. Hard by, standeth Bridlington a towne very well knowne by reason of Iohn of Bridlington a poeticall monkish pro∣phet whose ridiculous prophesies in Rhime I have read albeit they were not worth the reading. And not farre from hence, for a great length toward Driffield, was there a ditch cast up and brought on by the Earles of Holdernesse, to confine and bound their lands, which they called Earles Dyke. But whence this little nation here inhabi∣ting were named GABRANTOVICI, I dare not search, unlesse happily it were of goates which the Britans tearme Gaffran, and whereof there is not greater store in al Britain than hereabout. Neither ought this derivation of the name to seeme absurd, seeing that Aegira in Achaia borroweth the name of goats, Nebrodes in Sicily of fal∣low Deere, Flambor∣rough-head. and Boeotia in Greece, of Kine and Oxen. That little Promontory which with his bent made this creeke, is commonly called Flamborough head, and in the Saxon tongue Fleam- by Authors, who write that Ida the Saxon, who first sub∣dued these Countries, arrived here. Some think it took the name from a watchtowre which did by night put forth a flame or burning light for to direct sailers into the haven. For, the Britans retaine yet out of the provinciall language this word, Flam: and Mariners paint this creeke in their sea-cards with a blazing flame on the head. Yet others are of opinion, that this name arrived in this Island with the English out of Angloen in Denmarke, the ancient seat of the English nation; for, there is a towne called Flemsburg, Flamborough. and that the Englishmen from hence called it so: like as the Gaules, as Livie witnesseth, tearmed Mediolanum, that is, Millan, in Itali , af∣ter the name of Mediolanum in Gaule, which they had left behinde them. For, there is a little village in this Promontory named Flamborrough, where an other notable house of the Constables had anciently their seat, Constable de Flamborough. which some doe de∣rive from the Lacies Constables of Chester. Beeing in these parts I could learne nothing for all the enquirie that I made, as touching the bournes commonly called Vipseys, Vipseys waters. which (as Walter of Heminburgh hath recorded) flow every other yeere out of blinde springs and runne with a forcible and violent streame toward the sea nere unto this Promontory. Yet take here with you, that which William Newbrigensis who was borne neare that place writeth of them. Those famous waters which common∣ly are called Vipseys, rise out of the earth from many sources not continually, but every second yeere, and being growne unto a great bourn runne downe by the lower grounds into the sea. Which when they are dry, it is a good signe: for, their breaking out and flowing is said to bee an infallible token portending some dearth to ensue. From thence the shore is drawne in, whereby there runneth forth into the sea a certaine shelfe or slang, like unto an out-thrust tongue, such as Englishmen in old time termed a File, whereupon the little village there Filey tooke name: and more within the land you see Flixton, where, in King Athelstanes time was built an Hospi∣tall, for the defence (thus word for word it is recorded) of way-faring people passing that way from Wolves, least they should be devoured. Whereby it appeareth for certaine, that in those daies Wolves made foule worke in this Tract, Wolves. which now are no where to be seene in England, no not in the very marches toward Scotland; and yet within Scotland there be numbers of them in most places. This little territory or Seigniory of Holdernesse, Earles of Au∣marle and Holdernesse. King William the First gave to Drugh Buerer a Fleming, upon whom also he had bestowed his Niece in marriage; whom when hee had made away by poison and thereupon fled to save himselfe, hee had to succeed him Stephen the sonne of Odo, Fitz. Odo. An ancient Genealogy or pedigree. Lord of Aulbemarle in Normandy who was descended from the Earles of Champaigne: whom King William the First because hee was his Nephew by the halfe sister of the mothers side, as they write, made Earle of Aulbemarle: whose posterity in England retained the Title, al∣though Aulbemarle be a place in Normandy. His successour was William sirnamed Le Grosse: Cr ssu . whose onely daughter Avis was marryed to three husbands one after another, namely to William Magnavill Earle of Essex, to Baldwine De Beton, and William Forts, or de Fortibus, by this last husband onely shee had issue William, who also had a sonne named William. His onely daughter Avelin, being the wedded wife of Edmund Crouchbacke, Gibbosus. Earle of Lancaster, dyed without children. And so, as wee reade in the booke of Meaux Abbay, for default of heires, the Earldome of Aulbemarle and honour of Holdernesse, were seized into the Kings hands. Howbeit in the ages ensuing King Richard the Second created Thomas of Woodstocke his Unkle, and afterwards Edward Plantagenet Earle of Rutland, the Duke of Yorkes sonne, Duke of Aulbemarle, in his fathers life time: likewise King Henry the Fourth made his owne sonne Thomas, Duke of Clarence and Earle of Aulbemarle: which Title King Henry the Sixth afterward added unto the stile of Richard Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, for the greater augmentation of his honour. EBORACENSIS Comi a us pars Septentrionalis vulgo NORTH RIDING NORTH-RIDING. S Carce two miles above Flamborrough-head, beginneth the NORTH-RIDING or the North part of this Country, North Riding. which affronting the other parts, and beginning at the Sea, is stretched out Westward, and carrieth a very long Tract with it (though not so broad) for threescore miles together, even as farre as to Westmorland: limited on the one side with Der∣went, and for a while with the River Ure, on the other side with Tees running all along it, which on the North Coast se∣parateth it from the Bishopricke of Durrham. And very fitly may this part bee divi∣ded into, Blackamore, Cliveland, Northallverton-shire, and Richmond-shire. That which lyeth East, and bendeth toward the Sea is called Blackamore, that is, The blacke moorish land: For it is mountanous and craggy. The Sea coast there∣of, hath Scarborrough Castle, Scarborrough Castle. for the greatest ornament a very goodly and famous thing, in old time called , that is, A Burgh upon the Scar, or steepe Rocke. The description whereof have heere out of William of Newburgh his History. A Rocke of a wonderfull height and bignesse, which by reason of steepe cragges and cliffes, almost on every side is unaccessible, beareth into the Sea; wherewith it is all compassed about, save onely a certaine streight in manner of a gullet, which yeeldeth accesse, and openeth into the West: having in the toppe a very faire, greene, and large Plaine containing about three∣score acres of ground or rather more; a little Well also of fresh water springing out of a sto∣ny Rocke. In the foresaid gullet or passage, which a man shall have much adoe to ascend up unto, standeth a stately and Princelike Towre: and beneath the said passage beginneth the City or Towre, spreading two sides South and North, but having the sore part Westward: and verily it is fensed afront with a wall of the owne: but on the East fortified with the rocke of the Castle: and both the sides thereof are watered with the Sea. This place William Le Grosse, Earle of Aulbemarle and Holdernesse viewing well, and seeing it to bee a con∣venient plot for to build a Castle upon, helping Nature forward with a very costly worke closed the whole plaine of the Rocke with a Wall, and built a Towre in the very streight of the passage: which being in processe of time fallen downe, King Henry the Second caused to bee built in the same place a great and goodly Castle; after hee had now brought under the Nobles of England, who during the loose government of King Stephen had consumed the lands of the Crowne: but especially amongst others, that William abovesaid of Aulbemarle, who had in this Tract ruled and reigned like a King, and possessed himselfe of this place as his owne. Touching the most project boldnesse of Thomas Stafford, who to the end hee might overthrow himselfe with great attempts, with a few Frenchmen surprised this Castle of a sudden in Queene Maries Raigne and held it for two daies together, I neede not to speake: See Dier 144. ne yet of Sherleis, a Gentleman of France, who having accom∣panied him, was judicially endited and convict of high treason, albeit he was a for∣rainer, because hee had done against the duty of his Alleageance, the peace then betweene the Kingdome of England and of France being in force. These are matters bet∣ter knowne than that the World can take notice of them by any writings of mine. Yet may this seeme a thing worth my labour and expedient, The gainfull fishing for Herrings. to note, how the Hol∣landers and Zelanders use to take marveilous plenty of herrings (call them in Latin Haleces, Leucomenida, or Chalcides, which of them you please) upon this coast, and make a very gainfull trade thereof, having anciently first obtained licence by an an∣cient custome, out of this Castle. For the Englishmen granted licence to fish, reser∣ving the honour to themselves, but resigning for lazinesse, as it were, the profit unto strangers. For, it is almost incredible, what infinite summes of money the Hollan∣ders raise unto themselves by this their fishing in our shore. These Herrings (pardon me I pray you if briefly by way of digression I doe make mention of Gods goodnesse towards us) which in our great grandfathers dayes kept as it were their station onely about Norway: now in our time not without the divine Providence, swimme yeerely round about this Isle of Britaine by skulles in wonderfull great numbers. About Midsommer they shoole out of the deepe and vast Northren-sea to the coasts of Scotland, at which time because they are then at the fattest, they bee streightwaies sold: Thence come they to the English East coast, and from the middest of August unto November, is the best and most plen∣teous taking of them betweene Scarborrough, and Tamis mouth. Afterwards by force of some great storme, they are carryed into the British sea, and there untill Christmas offer themselves to the fishers nettes; from hence divi∣ding themselves and swimming along both sides of Ireland, after they have coa∣sted round about Britaine, they take their course into the Northren Ocean, as their home, and there settle themselves as it were and rest untill June: where after they have cast their spawne and brought forth a yong fry, they returne againe in mighty great skulles and so march about these Isles. Whiles I am writing hereof, that comes into my minde which sometimes I read in Saint Ambrose. Fishes (saith hee) by infi∣nite numbers, meeting, as one would say, by common consent out of many places from sundry creekes of the Sea, with a joint flote, as it were, make toward the blastes of the North winde, and by a certaine direction and instinct of Nature haste into that Sea of the Northren parts. A man that saw the manner of them would say a certaine tide were comming downe from the current, Hexameron. lib. 5. cap. 80. they rush so forward and cut the waves, as they passe, with a violent power, through Propontis into Pontus Euxinus. But to my matter againe. From thence, the shore indented and interlaced with rockes, bendeth in, as farre as to the River Teise, The River Teise. and by a compasse that the said shore fetcheth, there is made a Bay about a mile broad, which of that Outlaw Robert Hood, so much talked of, wee call Robin Hoods Bay. Robbin Hoods Bay. For hee (as John Major the Scotishman writeth) flou∣rished in the Raigne of Richard the First; and the said Authour setteth him out with this commendation, that Hee was indeed an Arch-Robber but the gentellest Theefe that ever was. Dunum. Then DUNUS SINUS, a creeke mentioned by Ptolomee streight∣waies by giving backe of the shore on both sides sheweth it selfe; neere unto which standeth Dunesley a little village, Dunsley. Whitby. and hard by it, Whitby, in the English Saxon tongue ; which Beda expoundeth to bee, The Bay of a Watch-Towre. Neither will I call that interpretation into question, although in our language it doth resemble Sinum Salutis, that is, The Bay of health ; so, that I would say this very same was Salutaris Sinus, that is, The Bay of safety, but that the situation in the Geo∣grapher did perswade me otherwise. Heere are found certaine stones fashioned like Serpents folded and wrapped round as in a wreathe even the very pastimes of Nature disporting her selfe: Stony Serpents of Hildas. who, as one saith, when shee is wearied as it were with serious workes, forgeth and shapeth some things by way of game and recrea∣tion. A man would thinke verily they had beene sometime Serpents, which, a coat or crust of stone had now covered all over. But people too credulous ascribe this to the Praiers of Saint Hilda, as if shee had thus transformed and changed them: who in our Primitive Church withstood to her power the shoring and shaving of Priests, and the celebration of Easter according to the order of Rome, when a Sy∣node was held touching these matters in the yeere of our Lord 664. in the Abbay which shee had built in this place, and whereof herselfe was first Governesse. Unto whose holinesse also they ascribe, that those wilde Geese, which in Win∣ter time flye by flockes unto Pooles and Rivers that are not frozen over, in the South parts; whiles they flye over certaine fields heere adjoyning, suddenly fall downe to the ground, Geese falling downe. to the exceeding great admiration of all men: a thing that I would not have related, had I not heard it from very many persons of right good cre∣dit. But such as are not given to superstitious credulity, attribute this unto a secret propriety of this ground, and to an hidden dissent between this soile and those geese, such as is betweene wolves and Squilla rootes. For provident Nature hath infused such like secret mutuall combinations, and contrarieties, which the learned tearme Sympathies and Antipathies, as all men acknowledge, for their preservation. After∣wards Edelfleda King Oswins daughter enriched this Abbay with most large reve∣newes, where also shee solemnized her fathers funerall obsequies. But at length the Danes robbing and spoiling where ever they came, utterly overthrew it: and al∣though Serle Percie reedified it, being immediately upon the comming in of the Nor∣mans head-ruler of the same; yet now it scarce affordeth any footing at all of the an∣cient dignity. Hard by, upon a steepe hill, howbeit betweene two others higher than it, Duke Wade from whom th families of the Wades derive▪ toward the Sea, stood by report, the Castle of Wada a Saxon Duke, who in that confused Anarchy of the Northumbers, and massacre of Princes and Nobles, having combined with those that murdred King Ethered, gave battaile unto King Ardulph at Whalley in Lancashire: but with so disasterous successe, that after his owne power was discomfited and put to flight, himselfe was faine to flie: and after∣wards by a languishing sicknesse ended his life; and heere within the hill betweene two entire and solid stones about seven foote high lieth entombed: which stones because they stand eleven foote asunder, the people doubt not to affirme, that hee was a mighty Giant. Neere unto this place, long time after, Peter Mauley▪ de Maloulacy built a Castle, which being full as it were of grace and beauty he named in French Moult-Grace, as wee reade in the History of Meaulx, but because it became a most grievous yoke unto the neighbour Inhabitants, the people masters alwaies of our u∣suall speech, Moul grave Castle. by change of one letter termed it Moult-grave, by which name although the reason thereof be not so well knowne, the world takes knowledge of it. This Pe∣ter de Mololacu, commonly called Mauley (that I may in this point satisfie the curi∣ous) borne in Poictou in France, marryed the onely daughter of Robert de Turnham, in the Raigne of King Richard the First: in whose right he entred upon a very great inheritance heere: Barons of Mauley. after whom succeeded in order seven Peters called Lords Mau∣ley: who give for their Armes A Bend Sables in an Eschocheon Or. But when the seventh dyed issuelesse, this the Manours of Dancaster, Bainton, Bridesalle, &c. were parted by the sisters, betweene the families of the Salvains and Bigots. Neere unto this place, Geat. as elsewhere in this shore, is found blacke Amber or Geate: Some take it to be Gagates, Gagates. which in old time they held to be one of the rare gems and precious stones. It groweth among the cliffes and rockes, where they chinke and gape asunder. Before it be polished, it is of a reddish and rusty colour: but af∣ter it bee once polished, it becommeth, as saith Solinus, as a Others are opinion that our pit cole o stone cole wa the old Gaga∣tes. Gemme of a bright ra∣diant blacke colour. Touching which, Rhemnius Palamon out of Dionysius Afer thus versifieth: Praefulget nigro splendore Gagates. Hic lapis ardescens austro perfus s aquarum, Ast oleo perdens flammas, mirabile visu Attritus rapit hic teneras seu succina fr ndes. The Geat is blacke and shineth passing bright, Which Stone in water dipt and drencht, takes fire and burneth light. In oile, a wonder for to see, the flame is quickly done, And like to Amber rub it hard, small stickes it catcheth soone. And Marbodaeus in his little booke of precious stones, Nascitur in Lycia lapis, & prope gemma Gagates, Sed genus eximium foecunda Britannia mittit, Lucidus & niger est, levis & lavissimu idem: Vicinas paleas trabit attritu calefactus, Ardet aqua lotus, restinguitur unctus olivo. Geat is a Stone, and Gemme well nere, that men in Lycia finde, But fruitfull Britan yeelds the best simply of all that kinde. Of colour blacke, yet bright it is, most smoothe and light withall; Well rubbed and enchaul'd thereby, thin strawes and fescues small That are neere hand it drawes thereto: it burnes in water drencht, Annoint the same with fatty oile, the flame streigthwaies is quencht. Heare also what Solinus saith; In Britaine there is great store of Gagates, or Geat, and an excellent stone it is: If you demand the colour, it is a bright radiant blacke: if the qua∣lity, it is in manner nothing weighty: If the nature, it burneth in water, and is quenched with oile: if the vertue, being made hote with rubbing, it holdeth such things as are applied there∣to. From Whitby the shore gives backe Westward: Cliveland. by which lyeth Cliveland, ta∣king that name as it seemeth of steepe bankes, which in our language wee call Cliffes ; for, there runne all along the side thereof cliffie hilles; at the foote of which, the country spreadeth into a Plaine full of fertile fields. Upon the shore, Sken grave a little Village is much benefited by taking great store of fish: where also, by report, was caught a Sea-man about 70. yeeres since, that for certaine daies together fed of raw fishes: but espying his opportunity escaped away unto his proper element againe. Whensoever the windes are laied, and that up∣on still weather the sea is most calme, and the water lieth as one would say levell and plaine without any noise: there is heard heere many times on a sudden a great way off, as it were, an horrible and a fearefull groning: at which time the fishermen dare not launch out farre into the deepe, as beleeving according to their shallow reach, that the Ocean is a fell and cruell beast, and being then very hungry desireth greedily in that sort to devoure mens bodies. Beneath Sken-grave, is situate Kilton Castle within a Parke, which belonged sometime to the habitation of the Thwengs, whose patri∣mony descended to the Barons of Lumley, Hilton, and Daubeneie: And there joyneth almost close unto it Skelton Castle, appertaining to the ancient family of the Barons Brus, Brius of Skel∣ton. who derive their descent from Robert Brus the Norman. The said Robert had two sonnes, Adam Lord of Skelton, and Robert of Anan-dale in Scotland: from whom is descended the royall stem of Scotland. But Peter Brus the fifth Lord of Skelton di∣ed without issue, and left his sisters to inherite: namely Agnes, wife to Walter Falcon∣berg: Lucie, Barons Falcon∣berg. wedded to Marmaduke Thweng, of whom is come the Baron Lumley: Margaret, married to Robert Ros ; and Laderina to John Belle-eau, men in that age of honourable reputation. The heires successively of Walter Falconberg flourished a long time; but in the end by a female, the possessions came to Sir William Nevill, who was a redoubted Knight for martiall prowesse, and by King Edward the Fourth advanced to the title of Earle of Kent. And his daughters were bestowed in marri∣age upon Sir John Cogniers, N. Bedhowing, and R. Strangwaies. Neere unto Hunt-cliffe, and not farre from the shore there appeare aloft at a vale water certaine Rockes, about which the fishes that wee call Seales, short (as some thinke) for Sea-veales, meete together in droves to sleepe and sunne themselves: and upon that rocke which is next unto the shore, there lieth one, as it were to keepe the Centinell: and as any man approcheth neere, he either by throwing downe a big stone, or by tumbling himselfe into the water with a great noise, giveth a signall to the rest to looke unto themselves and get into the water. Most affraid they bee of men: against whom when they chase them, they being destitute of water fling backeward with their hinder feete a cloud, as it were, of sand and gravell stones, yea and often times drive them away: For women they care not so much: and therefore whosoever would take them, use to bee clad in womens apparell. In the same coast are found stones, some of yellowish, others of a reddish colour, and some againe with a rough cast crust over them of a certaine salt matter, which by their smell and taste make shew of Coperose, Nitre, and Brimstone: and also great store of Marquesites in colour resembling brasse. Hard by, at Huntly Nabb, the shore that lay for a great way in length open, riseth now up with craggy rockes, at the rootes wherof there lie scattering here and there stones of divers bignesse, so artificially by nature shaped round in maner of a Globe, that one would take them to be big bullets made by the turners hand for shot to bee discharged out of great ordinance. In which, if you breake them, are found stony serpents enwrapped round like a wreath, but most of them are headles. Then see you from thence Wilton Castle, sometime the Bulmers : and above it at Dobham the river Tees voideth into the Sea after it hath lodged sundry rivers, and at the last one that is namelesse, Yare. Stokesley. beside Yare a mercate towne well knowne, which river watereth Stokes∣ley, a little mercate towne, likewise that hath a long time appertained to the Noble family of Eure. Beneath which places, Wharton Castle belonging in times past to the Barons Menill, and Harlsey to the family of Hotham and afterward to Stragwaies, now wrestle with old age, and hardly hold up their heads. The mouth of Tees aforesaid, suspected in times past of sailers, is now found to be a sure road and harbour: and to give direction for safe accesse and entrance unto it, there are erected on both sides thereof within our remembrance high turrets with light. Gisburgh. Foure miles from this Tees mouth, standeth Gisburgh on high; now a small towne, but whiles it stood in flourishing estate, it was right glorious for a very faire and rich Abbay, built by Robert de Brus, Lord of the place, about the yeere of our Salvation 1119, and for the common buriall place of all the gentry and nobility in this tract; which also brought forth Walter de Heminford no unlearned Historio∣grapher. This verily is a passing good place, and may well for pleasantnesse, delight∣some variety, and rare gifts of Nature, contend with Puteoli in Italy, which in regard of healthy situation it also farre excelleth. The aire is mollified and made more mild by the mountaines seated betweene it, and what way the sea yeeldeth a cold and winterly disposition: the soile fruitfull and plenteous in grasse affordeth delectable floures a great part of the yeere, and richly aboundeth with vaines of metall and A∣lum-earth of sundry colours, but especially of ocher and murray, likewise of iron, out of which they have now begunne to try very good Alum, and Coperose. Which with learned skill and cunning not many yeeres since, Sir Thomas Chal ner Knight (a learned searcher into natures workes, and unto whose charge, our most high and mightie King hath committed his son Prince Henry, the lovely joy and delight of Brittaine) first discovered, by observing, that the leaves of trees were of a more weak greene colour here than in other places; that the oakes had their rootes spreading broad but very eb within the ground, the which had much strength but small store of sappe, that the earth standing upon clay, and being of divers colours, whitish, yellowish, and blew, was never frozen, and in a cleere night, glittered in the pathes like unto glasse. Onusbery hill or Rosebery-Topping. Not farre off, Onusbery or Rosebery Topping mounteth up a mighty height, and maketh a goodly shew a farre off, serving unto sailers for a marke of di∣rection, and to the neighbour inhabitants for a prognostication: For, so often as the head thereof hath his cloudy cap on, lightly there followeth raine: whereupon they have a Proverbiall Rhime, when Rosebery Topping weares a cap: Let Cliveland then be∣ware a clap. Neere unto the top of it, out of an huge rocke there floweth a spring of water medicinable for diseased eies: and from hence there is a most goodly and plea∣sant prospect downe into the vallies below lying a great way about, to the hils full of grasse, greene meddowes, delightsome pastures, fruitfull corne fields, riverets sto∣red with fish, the river Tees mouth full of rodes and harbours, the ground plaine and open without danger of inundation, and into the sea with ships therein under saile. Beneath it, standeth Kildale, a Castle of the Percies Earles of Northumberland: and more Eastward Danby, which from Brus also by the Thwengs came unto the Baron Latimers, from whose heire descended the Willoughbeies, Barons of Brooke. But this Danby with other possessions was sold to the Nevills, of which family Sir George Nevill was by King Henry the sixth called among the Barons to the Parliaments, un∣der the name of Lord Latimer, in whose progenie and posterity this dignity hath continued unto our daies. There remaineth nothing else heere for me to note, but that the Barons Meinill held certaine lands in this shire of the Archbishops of Can∣terbury, The History of Canterbury. and for the same, the Coigniers, Strangwaies and Darcies, descended from them, are bound to performe certaine service to the said Archbishops. And whereas the King of England by his Prerogative shall have the Wardship (these bee the very words of the Praerogative) of all their lands who hold of him in chiefe by Knights service, Praerogativae Reg. 17. Ed. 2. of which themselves as tenants shall be seized in their Demesne as of Fae, the day whereon they die, of whomsoever they held by the like service, so that themselves notwithstanding hold of the King any tenement of the ancient demesne of the Crowne, unto the full and lawfull age of the heire: Yet are excepted these Fees and others of the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Durrham, betweene Tine and Tees, &c. so that they may have the Wardship of such lands, although elsewhere they held of the King. Farther within the country among the mountaines of Blaca amore, there offereth it selfe (besides wandering beakes and violent swift brookes, which challenge the vallies every where, as their owne to passe through) no memorable thing, unlesse it be Pickering ; a good bigge towne belonging to the Dutchy of Lancaster, situate upon an hill and fortified with an old Castle, unto which a number of small villages lying there round about doe appertaine: whereupon the country adjoyning is com∣monly called Pickering Lith, The Libertie of Pickering, and Forest of Pickering, the which King Henry the Third gave unto his younger sonne Edmund, Earle of Lan∣caster. Wherein, neere unto the river Darwent standeth Atton, that gave name un∣to the right noble family of the Attons Knights, descended from the Lords Vescy : the inheritance of which family, was by the daughters parted betweene Edward Saint Iohn, the Evers, and the Coigniers. Now from Edward Saint Iohn a great por∣tion thereof came by a daughter to Henrie Bromflet. 17. Hen. 6. Bromfleet Lord Vescy. Which Henrie verily was sum∣moned to the High court of Parliament by these expresse termes, elsewhere not to be found in Summons. Our Will is, that both yee and your heires males, of your body lawfully issuing, be Barons of Vescy. Afterwards, that title passed away by a daughter to the Cliffords. On the otherside, foure miles from Pickering, neere unto Dow, a swift running riveret, lieth Kirkby-Morside hard unto the hilles, whereof it had that name, a Market towne not of the meanest reckoning, and the possession sometime of the Estotevilles. Behind these, Westward, Rhidal lieth low, a goodly, pleasant and plentifull vale adorned with three and twenty Parish-churches, through the mids wherof runneth the river Rhie: A place (as saith William of Newburrough ) wast, desolate, and full of horrour, before that Walter Espec had granted it to the Monkes of the Cluniak or∣der, and founded there an Abbay. In this vale is Elmesly seated, which, if I deceive not my selfe, Bede called Vlmetum ; where, that Robert called de Rosse, surnamed Fur∣san built a Castle; nere unto which the river Recall hideth it selfe under the ground. More beneath, hard by the river side standeth Riton, an ancient possession of the an∣cient familie of the Percihaies, commonly named Percies. From thence Rhie carri∣eth with him the streames of many a brooke into Derwent, which watereth in this vale Malton a Market towne well knowne and frequented, for corne, horses, fish, and implements of husbandry: where are to be seene the foundations of an old Castle, belonging, Escaetria . Edw. 2 n. 63. Barons Vescy as I have heard say, in old time to the Vescies, Barons in these parts of great estate and honor. Their pedigree as appeareth evidently by the Kings re∣cords, is derived from William Tyson, who being Lord of Malton and of Alnewicke in Northumberland, was slain in the battaile at Hastings against the Normans. Whose onely daughter was given in marriage to Ivo de Vescy a Norman, and hee left behind him his only daughter likewise named Beatrice, with whō Eustach the son of Fitz Iohn Mon uli. with one eie contracted marriage, who in the raigne of Stephen founded the reli∣gious houses at Malton, and Watton. For, his second wife daughter to William, Con∣stable of Chester, was Ladie of Watton. William the sonne of Eustach by Beatrice, being ripped out of his mothers wombe, assumed unto him the name of Vescy, and the Armes, a Cross-floury Argent, in a shield Gueles. This William begat of Beatrice daughter to Robert Estotevill of Knaresburg, two sonnes, Eustach de Vescy, who tooke to wife Margaret daughter to William King of the Scots, and Sir Warin de Vescy Lord of Knapton. As for Eustach, father hee was of William, who begat John, that died without issue, The Vescies coate of Armes. Matth. Paris. M.S. and William, so renowned for his exploits in Ireland; and these changed the Armes of their house, into a shield Or with a crosse Sables. But Willi∣am, after that his legitimate sonne John, died in the warre of Wales, granted unto King Edward certaine lands in Ireland, that his illegitimate sonne William surna∣med of Kildare, might inherit his fathers estate. And hee ordained Anthony Bec Bishop of Durrham his feofie in trust to the use of his sonne: but he was scarce trusty as touching Alnewic, Eltham in Kent, and other lands; which he is reported to have conveied indirectly to his owne use. This illegitimate sonne young Vescy was slaine in the Battaile of Sterling in Scotland. And at length the title fell backe unto the line of the Attons, considering that Margaret the only daughter of Sir Gwarin Vescy was wedded unto Gilbert de Atton. But, heereof enough if not too much, and of it I have spoken before. Neere unto this vale there flourished two famous Abbaies, Newborrough (unto which we are indebted for William of Newborrough, a learned and diligent writer of the English Historie) now, the habitation of the worshipfull family of Bellasise, descended out of the Bishopricke of Durrham: and Bellelan∣da commonly Biland, Mowbraie. both founded and endowed by Robert Mowbray. This family of the Mowbraies was for power, nobility, and wealth comparable to any other, and possessed very faire lands with the Castles of Slingesby, Threske, and others in this Tract. The originall of this race if you desire to understand, I will compendiously set it downe. When Roger de Mowbray Earle of Northumberland, and R. In other places he is named De Fronte-bovis. de Grun∣de-beofe for their disloialtie were dissezed of all their possessions, King Henry the First bestowed a great part thereof upon Nigell, or Niele de Albenie of the same fa∣mily that the Albeneis Earles of Arundell were descended; a man of very high birth in Normandie, who had bin Bowbearer to King William Rufus: and so enriched him thereby, The Register of Fountains Abbay. that he held in England 140. Knights fees, and in Normandie 120. He commanded also that Roger his sonne should assume the name of Mowbray: from whom flowred out the Mowbraies Earles of Nottingham, and Dukes of Norfolke. To these Mowbraies also belonged in times past Gilling Castle standing hard by: but now unto that ancient and worshipfull family, which of their faire bush of haire got their name Fairfax. Fair-fax. Fax. For Fax in the old English tongue signifieth haires, or the haire of the head: whereupon our progenitours called a Comet or blasing starre, A Faxed starre, like as a place, whereof I have spoken before, Haly-fax, of holy haires. Then beneath these, Southward, lieth Calaterium Nemus, commonly called, The Forest of Galtres, shaded in some places with trees, in other some a wet flat, full of moist and moorish quavemires: very notorious in these daies by rea∣son of a solemne horse running, A solemne Horse-running. wherein the horse that outrunneth the rest hath for his prise a little golden bell. It is almost incredible what a multitude of people conflow hither from all parts to these games, and what great wagers are laid on the horses heads for their swift running. In this Forest standeth Creac, which Egfrid King of Northumberland in the yeer 684, gave with three miles round about unto Saint Cuthbert: by whom it came to the Church of Durrham. Scarce foure miles hence is situate most pleasantly among little woods and groves Sherry-Hutton, a very pro∣per Castle built by Sir Bertrand Bulmer, and reedified by Raulph Nevil, the first Earle of Westmorland. Neere unto which standeth Hinderskell a little Castle, built by the Barons of Greystocke, which others call Hunderd-skell, of a number of fountaines that spring up and rise there. Behind the hilles Westward, where the country spreadeth it selfe out againe into a more fresh and plaine champion, lieth Alverton-shire, commonly called Northal∣lerton-shire, North-Al er∣ton shire. a little countrie watered with the riveret Wiske, and taking the name of Northalverton a towne, sometime called , which is nothing else but a long broad street; howbeit, having in it on S. Bartholomewes day the greatest Faire of Kine and Oxen, and of most resort, that ever I saw in all my life. King William Rufus gave this with the territory adjoining unto the Church of Durrham, to the Bishops of which See it is very much beholden. For, William Comin who by force held the Bishopricke of Durrham, built the Castle there, and granted it unto his nephew, which now is in manner quite decaied and gone. The Bishops likewise his successors granted unto it certaine liberties and immunities. For, in the Booke of Durrham we read that Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durrham fortified the towne, Cap. 126. having obtained licence of the King, that among those unlawfull castles, which by Commandement were then destroyed in many places of England, this onely should have the priviledge to stand still: which not∣withstanding, the King commanded afterward to be layd even with the ground. Battaile of Standard. Hard by this, was that field foughten, which they commonly call the Battaile of the Standard: in which, David King of Scots, who with his unexampled cruelty had made this country almost a wildernesse, was after so great a slaughter of his people put to flight; that then and never before our countrimen thought they were fully reven∣ged. For, that indeed came to passe in this battaile, which Raulfe the Bishop said, when before the battaile in an oration he encouraged the English to fight: A con∣fused multitude untrained, is an impediment to it selfe, in prosperous successe to hurt others; and in adverse fortune, to escape it selfe. This was called The battaile of the Standard, because the English keeping themselves close together about the standard received the first onset and shock of the Scotish, endured it, and at length put them to flight. And this Standard as I have seene it pictured in ancient bookes, was a mighty huge cha∣riot supported with wheeles, wherein was set a pole of a great height in manner of a mast, and upon the very top thereof stood a crosse to bee seene, and under the crosse hung a banner. This when it was advanced was a token, that every one should prepare himselfe to fight, and it was reputed as an holy and sacred altar that each man was to defend with all power possible, resembling the same for al the world that Carrocium of the Italians, which might never be brought abroad but in the grea∣test extremitie and danger of the whole state. Within this litle shire also, Threske, commonly called Thruske is worth to bee mentioned: which had sometime a most strong Castle out of which Roger Mowbray displaied his banner of rebellion, and called in the king of Scots to the overthrow of his owne native Country: what time as King Henry the Second had rashly and in∣considerately digged, as it were, his owne grave, by investing his sonne King, in e∣quall authority with himselfe. But this rebellion was in the end quenched with bloud, and this Castle quite dismantled: so that beside a ditch and rampire, I could see no∣thing there of a Castle. Another firebrand also of rebellion flamed out heere in the Raigne of Henry the Seventh. For when the unruly Commons tooke it most grie∣vously that a light subsidie granted by the States of the Kingdome in Parliament, was exacted of them, and had driven away the Collectors thereof, forthwith (as it is commonly seene that Rashnesse speeding once well can never keepe a meane nor make an end) they violently set upon Henry Percie, Earle of Northumber∣land slaine by Rebells. Earle of Northumberland, who was Lieutenant of these parts, and slew him in this place: and having John Egremond to be their leader, tooke armes against their Country and their Prince: but a few daies after they felt the smart of their lawlesse insolency grievously and justly as they had deserved. Heere hard by are Soureby and Brakenbake, belonging to a very anci∣ent and right worshipfull family of the L scelles: also more Southward Sezay, some∣time of the Darels (from whence a great family branched) and afterwards the Daw∣nies who for a long time flourished heere maintaining the degree and dignity of Knights right worthily. Earles and Dukes of Yorke. The first and onely Earle of Yorke (after William Mallet, and one or two Estotevils of the Norman bloud, who they say were Sheriffes by inheritance) was Otho son to Henry Leo Duke of Bavar and Saxony, by Maude the daughter of Henry the Second, King of England, who was afterwards proclaimed Emperour and stiled by the name of Otho the fourth. From whose brother William, another sonne of Maud, are de∣scended the Dukes of Brunswicke and Luneburgh in Germanie, who for a token of this their kinred with the Kings of England give the same Armes that the first Kings of England of Norman bloud bare, to wit two Leopards or Lions Or, in a shield Gueles. Long after, King Richard the Second created Edmund of Langley, fifth sonne of King Edward the Third, Duke of Yorke: who by a second daughter of Peter King of Castile and of Leon had two sonnes. Edward the eldest, in his fathers life time, was first Earle of Cambridge, afterwards Duke of Aumarle, and in the end Duke of Yorke; who manfully fighting in the battaile at Agincourt in France lost his life, leaving no children: and Richard his second sonne Earle of Cambridge, who having marryed Anne sister of Edmund Mortimer, Earle of March. whose grandmother like∣wise was the onely daughter of Leonell Duke of Clarence, and practising to ad∣vance Edmund his wives brother to the royall dignity, was streightwaies intercep∣ted and beheaded, as if hee had beene corrupted by the French to destroy King Henry the Fifth. Sixteene yeeres after, his sonne Richard, was restored in bloud through the ex∣ceeding, but unadvised favour of King Henry the Sixth: Parliament. 10. Hen. 6. as being sonne to Richard Earle of Cambridge brother to Edward Duke of Yorke, and cozin also to Edmund Earle of March. And now being Duke of Yorke, Earle of March and of Vlster, Lord of Wigmore, Clare, Trim, and Conaght, hee bare himselfe so lofty, that shortly hee made claime openly in Parliament, against King Henry the Sixth, as in his owne right, for the Crowne: which he had closely affected by indirect courses before in making complaints of the misgovernment of the State, spreading seditious rumours, scat∣tering Libels abroad, complotting secret Conspiracies, and stirring up tumults, yea and open Warres: laying downe his Title thus, as being the sonne of Anne Morti∣mer, who came of Philip the daughter and sole heire of Leonel Duke of Clarence, third sonne of King Edward the Third, and therefore to be preferred by very good right, in succession of the Kingdome, before the children of John of Gaunt the fourth sonne of the said Edward the Third. And when answere was made unto him, that the Nobles of the Realme and the Duke himselfe had sworne Alleageance unto the King, Out of the Rols of the Parliament. 39. of Hen. the 6. that the Kingdome by authority of Parliament had beene conferred and entailed upon Henry the Fourth and his heires; that the Duke claiming his Title, from the Duke of Clarence never tooke upon him the Armes of the Duke of Cla∣rence, that Henry the Fourth held the Crowne in right from King Henry the Third; hee easily avoyded all these allegations: namely, that the said oath unto the King taken by mans law was in no wise to bee performed, when as it tended to the sup∣pression of the truth and right, which stand by the Law of God: That, there was no need of Parliamentary authority to entaile the Crowne and Kingdome unto the Lancastrians, neither would they themselves seeke for it so, if they had stood upon any right thereunto. As for the Armes of the Duke of Clarence which were his by right hee forbare of purpose to give them untill then; like as hee did, to claime his right to the Imperiall Crowne: And as for the right or Title derived from king Henry the Third, it was a meere ridiculous devise and manifest untruth to cloake the violent usurpation of Henry the Fourth, and therefore condemned of all men. Albeit these plees in the behalfe of the Duke of Yorke stood directly with law: yet, for remedy of imminent dangers the matter was ordered thus by the wisdome of the Parliament: That Henry the Sixth should enjoy the right of the Kingdome for tearme of life onely and that Richard Duke of Yorke should be proclaimed heire ap∣parant of the Kingdome, he and his heires to succeed after him: provided alwaies, that neither of them should plot or practise ought to the destruction of the other. Howbeit the Duke immediately was transported so headlong with ambition, Warre between the House of Lancaster and Yorke, or the red Rose and the white. that hee went about to preoccupate and forestall his owne hopes, and so hee raised that deadly Warre betweene the Houses of Yorke and Lancaster, distinguished by the white and red Rose, wherein himselfe soone after lost his life at Wakefield, King Henry the Sixth was foure times taken Prisoner, and in the end despoiled both of his Kingdome and life. Edward Earle of March sonne to the said Richard, obtained the Crowne, and being deposed from the same, recovered it againe (thus inconstant for∣tune disported herselfe, See pag. 570. lifting up and throwing downe Princes at her pleasure) ma∣ny Princes of the royall bloud, and a number of the Nobility lost their lives: those hereditary and rich Provinces in France belonging to the Kings of England were lost, the wealth of the Realme wholly wasted, and the poore people thereof over∣whelmed with all manner of misery. Edward now being established in his royall Throne, and in the ranke of Kings carrying the name of Edward the Fourth, gave unto Richard his second sonne the Title of Duke of Yorke, who together with king Edward the Fifth his brother was by their Unkle Richard the Third murdered. Then king Henry the Seventh granted the same Title unto his younger sonne, who afterwards was crowned king of England by the name of Henry the Eight. And even now of late King James invested Charles his second sonne (whom before, 1604. hee had created in Scotland Duke of Albany, Marquesse of Ormond, Earle of Rosse and Baron of Ardmanoch ) a childe not full foure yeeres of age, Duke of Yorke, by cincture of a sword, imposition of a Cap and Coronet of gold upon his head, and by de∣livering unto him a verge of gold: after he had according to the order with due complements made the day before, both him and eleven more of Noble Parentage, Knights of the Bath. Reckoned there are in this County Parishes 459. under which he very many Chappels, for number of Inhabitants equall unto great Parishes. RICHMOND-SHIRE. T HE rest of this Country which lyeth toward the North-West and carryeth a great compasse, is called Richmond-shire, or Richmount-shire, taking the name from a Castle, which Alan Earle of little Britaine had built: unto whom William the Conquerour gave this Shire (which before time belonged to Eadwin an Englishman) by these short letters Patents as it is set downe in the booke of Richmond Fees. I William sirnamed Bastard, King of England, doe give and grant unto thee my Nephew Alane Earle of Britaine, He was his sonne in law. and to thine heires for ever, all and every the Manour houses and lands which late belonged to Earle Eadwin in Yorke-shire, with the Knights fees and other liberties and customes, as freely and in as honourable wise, as the said Eadwin held the same: Given at our Leaguer before the City of Yorke. This Shire most of it lieth very high, with ragged rockes and swelling moun∣taines, whose sloping sides in some places beare good grasse, the bottomes and val∣lies are not altogether unfruitfull. The hilles themselves within, are stored with lead, Copper, lead, and stone-cole, or pit-cole. pit-coale, and Coper. For, in a Charter of king Edward the Fourth, there is mention made of a Mine or Delfe of Copper, neere unto the very towne of Richmond. But covetousnesse, which driveth men even as farre as to hell hath not yet pierced into these hilles, affrighted perchance with the difficulty of carriage: whereas there have beene found in the tops of these mountaines, as also in other places stones like unto sea winkles or cockles and other sea fish, Stone cocles and winkles. if they be not the wonders of nature, I will with Orosius a Christian Historiographer deeme them to be undoubted tokens of the generall deluge that surrounded the face of the whole earth in Noahs time. When the Sea (saith he) in Noahs daies overflowed all the earth, and brought a generall floud, so that the whole Globe thereof, being therewith surrounded and covered, there was one face, as of the Firmament, so also of the Sea. The soundest Writers most evidently teach, That all mankinde perished, a few persons excepted, who by vertue of their faith were reserved alive for offspring and propagation. Howbeit even they also have witnessed that some there had beene, who although they were ignorant of the times past, and knew not the Authour himselfe of times, yet gathered conjecturally as much by giving a guesse by those rough stones, which wee are wont to finde on hilles remote from the Sea, resembling Cocles and Oisters, yea and oftentimes eaten in hollow, with the waters. Where this Country bordereth upon Lancashire ; amongst the mountaines it is in most places so waste, solitary, unpleasant, and unsightly, so mute and still also, that the borderers dwelling thereby have called certaine Riverets creeping this way, Hell-beckes. Hell-beckes. But especially that, about the head of the River Ure, which having a Bridge over it of one entire stone falleth downe such a depth, that it striketh in a certaine horror to as many as looke downe. And in this Tract there be safe harbors for Goates and Deere, as well red as fallow, which for their huge bignesse with their ragged and branching hornes are most sightly. The River Ure, which wee have often spoken of before, hath his fall heere out of the Westerne Mountaines; and first of all cutting through the middest of the Vale called Wentsedale, Wentsedale. whiles it is yet but small as being neere unto his Spring-head, where great flockes of Sheepe doe pasture, and which in some places bea∣reth Lead stones plentifully, is encreased by a little River comming out of the South called Baint, which with a great noise streameth out of the Poole Semer. At the very place where these Rivers meete, and where there stand a few small Cotages which of the first Bridge made over Ure, they call Baintbrig, there lay in old time a Garison of the Romanes: whereof the very Reliques are at this day remaining. For, on the toppe of an hill, which of a Fort, or Burge they now call Burgh, appeare the ground workes of an ancient Hold, containing about five acres of ground in compasse; and beneath it Eastward, many tokens of some old habita∣tion and dwelling places. Where, amongst many other signes of Roman Antiquity, I have seene of late this fragment of an antique Inscription in a very faire letter, with Winged Victory supporting the same. IMP CAES. L. SEPTIMIO PIO PERTINACI AUGU.— IMP CAESARI. M. AURELIO APIO FELICI AUGUSTO — The name of Geta rased out. BRACCHIO CAEMEN∣TICIUM VI NER VIO∣RUM SUB CURALA SE∣NECINON AMPLISSI∣MIO PERIL. VISPIUS —PRAELEGIO.— Bracchium. By this we may guesse, that the said hold at Burgh, was in times past named BRAC∣CHIUM, which before time had been made of turfe, but now built with stone and the same layed with good morter. Also, that the sixth Cohort of the Nervians lay there in Garison who may seeme to have had also their place of Summer aboade in that high hill hard by fensed with a banke and trench about it, which now they tearme Ethelbury. And not long since, there was digged up the Statue of Aurelius Commodus the Emperour: The statue of Emperour Commodus. who, as Lampridius writeth, was sirnamed by his flatte∣ring clawbackes, BRITANNICUS, even when the Britans would have elected an Emperour against him. And then it may seeme, was this Statue of his set up, when he prizing himselfe more than a man, proceeded to that folly, that he gave comman∣dement he should be called, The Romane Hercules, Iupiters sonne. For, hee was por∣traied in the habite of Hercules, and his right hand armed with a club: under which there lay, as I have heard, such a mangled Inscription as this, broken heere and there with voide places betweene: the draught whereof was badly taken out, and before I came hither was utterly spoiled. —CAESARI, AUGUSTO MARCI AURELII FILIO — SEN IONIS AMPLISSIMI VENTS PIUS. This was to be seene in Nappa, an house built with turrets, and the chiefe seat of the Medcalfs, thought to be at this day the greatest family for multitude of the same name, The great fa∣mily of the Medcalfes. in all England: for, I have heard that Sir Christopher Medcalfe knight, and the top of this kinred beeing of late high-Sheriffe of the shire, accompanied with three hundred men of the same house all on horsback and in a livery, met and recei∣ved the Justices of Assizes, and so brought them to Yorke. From hence runneth Vre downe a maine, Creifishes. full of Creifishes, ever since Sir Christopher Medcalfe in our remem∣brance brought that kinde of fish hither out of the South part of England: and be∣tweene two rockes, whereof the place is named Att-scarre, it runneth head long downe, Bolton Castle. not far from Bolton, a stately Castle, the ancient seat of the Barons Scrops, and which Richard Lord le Scrope, Barons le Scrope. and Chancellour of England under king Richard the Second built with exceeding great coste: and now bending his course Eastward, commeth to Midelham, Midleham. the honour, whereof (as wee reade in the Genealogie or Pedegree of the Nevils ) Alan Earle of Richmond bestowed upon his younger brother Rinebald, with all the lands, which before their comming belonged to Gil∣patrick the Dane. Lords of Midleham. His nephew by his sonne Raulph, named Robert Fitz-Raulph, had all Wentsedale also by gift of Conan Earle of Britaine and of Richmond: and at Midleham raised a most strong Castle. His sonne Ranulph erected a little Abbay for Chanons at Coverham (called now short, Corham ) in Coverdale: whose sonne Raulph had a daughter named Mary, Genealogia antiqua. Coverham. who being wedded to Robert Lord Nevill with this marriage, translated this very faire and large inheritance as her portion into the fa∣mily of Nevils. Which Robert Nevill having had many children by his wife, was taken in adultery unknowne; and by the husband of the adulteresse: being for re∣venge berest of his genitours, shortly after dyed with extremity of paine. Then Ure after it hath passed a few miles forward watereth Iervis or Iorvalle Ab∣bay of Cistertians founded first at Fors, and after translated hither by Stephen Earle of Britaine and Richmond, Masham. but now wholly ruinated; and after that, Masham, which was the possession of the Scropes of Masham ; who as they sprung from the stocke of the Scropes of Bolton, so they were by marriages ingraffed againe into the same. On the other side of this River but more inward standeth Snath, Snath. the principall house of the Barons Latimer, Barons Lati∣mer. who derived their noble descent from George Nevill, younger sonne of Raulph Nevill the first Earle of Westmorland, and he received this Title of honour from king Henry the Sixth; when as the ancienter house of the Latimers ex∣pired in a female, and so by a continued succession they have flourished unto these our daies: when for default of male issue of the last Baron Latimer, that goodly and rich inheritance was divided among his daughters, marryed into the families of the Percies, Cecils, D'anvers and Cornwallis. Neither are there any other places in this part of the shire worth the naming that Ure runneth by, Tanfeld. unlesse it bee Tanfeld, the habitation in times past of the Gernegans knights: from whom it descended to the Marmions: Marmions. Inq. 6. H. 6. the last of whom left for his heire Amice second wife to John Lord Grey of Rotherfeld: by whom he had two sonnes; John that assumed the sirname of Marmion and died issuelesse: and Robert who left behinde him one onely daughter and sole heire Elizabeth, wife to Sir Henry Fitz-Hugh, a noble Baron. After this, Swale a sacred River. Ure entertaineth the River Swale, so called (as Th. Spot writeth) of his swiftnesse, selfe, into it with a maine and violent streame: which Swale runneth downe Eastward out of the West Mountaines also, scarce five miles above the head of Ure: a River reputed very sacred amongst the ancient English, for that in it, when the English Saxons first embraced Christianity, there were in one day baptized with festivall joy by Paulinus the Archbishop of Yorke, See pag. 136. above tenne thousand men, besides women and little children. This Swale passeth downe along an open Vale of good largenesse, which of it is called Swal-dale ; having good plenty of grasse, Marrick. but as great want of wood: first, by Marrick, where there stood an Abbay, built by the Askes men in old time of great name: also by Mask, a place full of lead ore. Then runneth it through Richmond, Richmond. the chiefe towne of the Country, having but a small circuit of walles, but yet by reason of the Suburbs lying out in length at three Gates well peopled and frequented. Which, Alan the first Earle thereof built, repo∣sing small trust in Gilling (a place or Manour house of his hard by) to withstand the violence of the Danes and English, Gilling. whom the Normans had despoiled of their in∣heritance, and hee adorned it with this name, as one would say, The rich Mount: he fensed it with a wall and a most strong Castle, which being set upon a rocke, from an high looketh downe to Swale, that with a mighty rumbling noise rusheth rather than runneth among the stones. For, the said house or Manour place of Gilling was more holy in regard of devout religion, than sure and strong for any fortification it had, e∣ver since that therein ( Beda calleth it Gethling ) Oswy King of Northumberland being entertained guest-wise, was by his hoste forelaid and murthered: for the expiation whereof, the said Monastery was built, highly accounted of among our ancestours. More Northward, Ravenswath. Barons Fitz-Hugh. Ravenswath Castle sheweth it selfe compassed with a good large wall, but now fallen, which was the seat of the Barons named Fitz-Hugh, extracted from the ancient line of the English Nation: who were Lords of the place before the Normans Conquest, and lived in great name unto King Henry the Seventh his daies, enriched with faire possessions by marriage with the heires of the noble houses of Furneaux, and Marmion: which came at last by the females unto the Fienes Lords Dacres in the South, and to the Parrs. Three miles beneath Richmond, Swale runneth by that ancient City which Ptolomee and Antonine call CATURACTONIUM and CATARRACTON, Caturacto∣nium. Catarrick. but Bede Catarractan, and in another place, the Village neere unto Catarracta: whereupon I suppose it had the name of Catarracta, that is, a Flud∣fall, or water-fall, considering hard by there is such a fall, but neerer unto Richmond ; where, Swale rusheth rather than runneth as I have said with foaming waters, meet∣ing heere and there with rockes, whereby his streame is interrupted and broken. And wherefore should he call it the Towne neere unto Catarracta, if there were not there a water-fall? That it was in those daies a most famous City may be gathered out of Ptolomee: because he tooke there an observation of the heavens position: for, in the second booke and 6. chapter of his Great Construction, he describeth and setteth downe the 24. Parallele, through Catarractonium in Britaine, and maketh it to bee distant from the Aequator 57. degrees: yet in his Geographicall Tables he defineth the longest day to be 18. Aequinoctiall houres: so that by his owne calculation and account, it is distant from the Aequator 58. degrees. But at this day, as said that Poet. —Magnum nil nisi Nomen habet. Nothing hath the same But onely a great name. Catarrick bridge. For it is but a small Village, called Catarrick and Catarrick-bridge ; howbeit well knowne both by the situation thereof nere unto the High street way which the Ro∣mans made, that here passeth over the river; and also by the heapes of rubbish here and there dispersed, which carry some shew of Antiquity, especially about Ketter∣cikswart and Burghale, somewhat farther off from the Bridge, and more Eastward hard by the river, where we beheld a mighty Mount and foure Bulwarkes raised as it were with exceeding great labour up to a great height. What sorrow it susteined in times past at the Picts and Saxons hands, when with fire and sword they made foule havocke of all the Cities in Britaine, I cannot certainly tell: but it seemeth to have flourished after the Saxon Empire was established: (Although Bede in every place calleth it Vicum, that is, a Village) untill that in the yeere 769. it was set on fire and burnt by Eanred or Beanred the Tyrant, who pitifully mangled the Kingdome of Northumberland. But both he streight after miserably perished by fire; and Catar∣ractoninum also beganne to revive againe out of the very ashes: For, in the 77. yeere after King Etheldred solemnized heere his marriage with the daughter of Offa King of the Mercians. Notwithstanding, it continued not long in good and flourishing estate: for, in that confusion immediately ensuing of the Danes who laied all waste, it was quite destroied. Swale driveth on with a long course, not without some lets heere and there in his streame, Hornby. not farre from Hornby Castle, belonging to the Family of Saint Quintin, which afterwards came to the Cogniers: and seeth nothing besides fresh pastures, country houses, and Villages, unlesse it be Bedal, standing by another River running into him: Fitz-Alan. which Bedal glorieth much of a Baron it had named Sir Brian Fitz-Alan who flourished in the daies of King Edward the First, in regard of his worth, and his ancient Nobility, as descended from the Earles of Britaine, and Richmond: But for default of heires males the inheritance came by the daughters, to Stapletons, and the Greies of Rotherfeld. By this time Swale having left Richmond-shire behinde, commeth neerer unto Ure or Ouse, where hee visiteth Topcliffe the chiefe seat of the Percies ; Marianus calleth it ; who writeth, that in the yeere of our Redemption 949. the States of Northumberland bound themselves there by an oath of Allegi∣ance unto King Eldred the West-Saxon. And at the very confluence of these Ri∣vers standeth Mitton, a small Village, but remarkable by no small slaughter. For, the Scottish in the yeere 1319. when the pestilence had consumed in manner all the manhood of England, having made an inrode thus farre robbing and ransacking all where they came, soone discomfited and put to flight no small power of Priests and country people, which the Archbishop of Yorke had led forth, with banner dis∣plaied into the field. But to returne backe againe to our matter. From CATARA∣CTONIUM, the high street or Port way divided it selfe in twaine: where it ta∣keth Northward, Caldwell. Aldburgh. it leadeth by Caldwell and Aldburgh, which betokeneth An old Burrough. By what name it was knowne in ancient times I cannot easily guesse. By the great ruines it should seeme to have beene some notable place: and neere at hand there is seene a ditch by Stanwig a little Village, that runneth eight miles in length betweene the River Tees and Swale. Where the said High way goeth Northwestward about twelve miles off you meet with Bowes, which also is written Bowgh ; now, a little Village: where in the ages aforegoing the Earles of Richmond had a prety Castelet, a certaine custome called Thorough-toll, and there Furcas, i. power to hang. But that in old time it was called in Antonines Itinerary, LAVA∣TRAE and LEVATRAE, both the account of distance, and the site thereof by the High street, which heere is evidently apparent by the ridge thereof, doe easily prove. But, that which maketh much to confirme the antiquity of it, is an ancient large Stone in the Church, sometimes used by them for an altar stone, with this in∣scription upon it, to the honour of Hadrian the Emperour. IMP. CAESARI DIVI TRAIANI PARTHICI. Max. filio DIVI NERVAE NEPOTI TRAIANO. Hadria NO AUG. PONT. MAXIM. — COS. I.—P. P. COH. IIII. F.— IO. SEV. This fragment also was there digged up. — — NOL. CAE FRONTINUS. COH. I. THRAC. — Whiles under Severus the Emperour, Virius Lupus ruled as Lieutenant Generall and Propraetor of Britaine, the first Cohort of the Thracians lay heere in Garison: for whose sake, he reedified the Bath or hote house: as appeareth by this inscription, which from hence hath beene translated to Cunnington, unto the house of that right worshipfull and learned Sir Robert Cotton, Knight. Fortè Dia For∣tunae. DAE. i. FORTUNAE VIRIUS LUPUS LEG. AUG. PR. PR. BALINEUM VI IGNIS EXUST∣UM. COH. I. THR∣ACUM REST∣ITUIT. CURANTE VAL. FRON∣TONE PRAE F— EQ. ALAE VETTO. Heere must I cause them to forgoe their errour, who by this Inscription falsely co∣pied forth, Bathea. whiles they read untruly BALINGIUM, for BALINEUM, are of opi∣nion, that the name of the place was BALINGIUM. But if a man looke neerer to the words, hee shall finde it most evidently engraven in the stone BALINEUM: which word they used in old time, Balineum or Balneum. as the learned know, for BALNEUM, that is, A BATH, or Hote-house: who also are not ignorant that souldiers, as well as others, used ordinarily to bathe, both for health, and cleanlinesse: as who every day, before they did eate, in that age were wont to bathe: as also, that such like bathing houses both publique and private were made every where with so great coste and superflu∣ous excesse, Seneca. That he thought himselfe poore and a very begger, who had not the walles of his bathing house resplendent with great and costly embossed Glasses. In which Bathes men and women both, washed one with another: albeit this had oftentimes beene prohibi∣ted as well by the Imperiall lawes, as the Synodall decrees. In the declining estate of the Roman Empire the Company or Band of the Explo∣ratores, with their Captaine kept their station heere, under the dispose of the Gene∣rall of Britaine: as appeareth for certaine out of the NOTICE of Provinces, where it is named LAVATRES. But whereas such Bathes as these, were called also in La∣tine Lavacra, some Criticke, no doubt, will pronounce, that this place was named LAVATRAE in stead of LAVACRA: yet would I rather have it take the name of a little river running neere by, which, as I heare say, is called Laver. As for the later name Bowes, considering the old Towne was heere burnt downe to the ground (as the inhabitants with one voice doe report) I would thinke, it grew upon that oc∣casion. For, that which is burnt with fire the Britans still at this day, doe terme Bo∣eth ; and by the same word, the Suburbes of Chester beyond the River Dee, which the Englishmen call Hanbridge, the Britans or Welshmen name Treboeth, that is, The burnt Towne, because in a tumult of the Welshmen it was consumed with fire. Heere beginneth to rise that high hilly and solitary Country exposed to winde and raine, Stane More. which because it is stony, is called in our native language Stane more. All heere round about is nothing but a wilde Desert, unlesse it bee an homely Hostelry, Spittle on Stane More. or Inne, in the very middest thereof, called The Spitle on Stane more, for to entertaine waifaring persons, and neere to it is a fragment of a Crosse, which wee call Rerecrosse, the Scots Reicrosse, as one would say, The Kings Crosse. Which Crosse, Hector Boetius the Scottish Writer recordeth to have beene erected as a meere stone confining England and Scotland; what time as King William the Conquerour granted Cumberland unto the Scots on this condition, that they should hold it of him as his Tenants, and not attempt any thing prejudiciall or hurtfull to the Crowne of England. And a little lower, upon the Romanes high street, there stood a little Fort of the Romans built foure square, Maiden Castle. which at this day they call Maiden-Castle. From whence, as the borderers reported, the said High way went with many win∣dings in and out, as farre as to Caer Vorran in Northumberland. There have beene divers Earles of Richmond according as the Princes favour en∣clined, Earles of Richmond. and those out of divers families: whom I will notwithstanding set downe as exactly and truely as I can, in their right order. The first Earles were out of the house of little Britaine in France, whose descent is confusedly intricate amongst their owne Writers, for that there were two principall Earles at once, one of Haulte Britaine, and another of Base Britaine for many yeeres, and every one of their chil∣dren had their part in Gavell kinde, and were stiled Earles of Britaine without distin∣ction. But of these the first Earle of Richmond, Guil. G mit. L. 7 c. 34. according to our Writers and Re∣cords, was Alane sirnamed Feregaunt, that is, The Red, sonne of Hoel Earle of Bri∣taine, descended from Hawise great Aunt to William Conquerour, who gave this Country unto him by name of the lands of Earle Eadwin in Yorke-shire, and withall bestowed his daughter upon him by whom he had no issue. Booke of Rich∣mond Fees. Register of Swasey. He built Richmond Castle, as is before specified, to defend himselfe from disinherited and outlawed English∣men in those parts: and dying left Britaine to his sonne Conan Le Grosse by a second wife. But Alane the Blacke sonne of Eudo sonne of Geffrey Earle of Britaine and Ha∣wise aforesaid, succeeded in Richmond, and he having no childe, lest it to Stephen his brother. This Stephen begat Alan sirnamed Le Savage his sonne and successour, who assisted king Stephen against Maude the Empresse in the battaile at Lincolne, Overus de S. Martino is a∣bout this time named Earle of Richmond. and married Bertha one of the heires of Conan Le Grosse Earle of Hault Britaine by whom hee had Conan Le Petit Earle of both Britaines by hereditary right, as well as of Richmond. Hee by the assistance of King Henrie the Second of England dispos∣sessed Endo Vicount of Porhoet his Father in Lawe who usurped the Title of Bri∣taine in right of the said Bertha his Wife: and ended his life leaving onely one daughter Constance by Margaret sister to Malcolne king of the Scots. Geffrey third Sonne to King Henry the Second of England was advanced by his Father to the marriage of the said Constance, whereby hee was Earle of Britaine and Richmond; and begat of her Arthur who succeeded him, and as the French write was made a∣way by King Iohn his Unkle. True it is indeed, that for this cause, the French called King Iohn into question, as Duke of Normandy: And notwithstanding he was ab∣sent, and not heard once to plead, neither confessing ought, nor convicted, yet by a definitive sentence they condemned him, and awarded from him, Normandy and his hereditary possessions in France: Normandy a∣warded away from the K.K. of England. Albeit himselfe had promised, under safe conduct to appeare in personally at Paris, there, to make answere as touching the death of Arthur: who as a Liege subject had bound himselfe by oath to bee true and loyall unto him, and yet started backe from his allegeance, raised a rebellion, and was ta∣ken prisoner in battaile. At which time this question was debated, whether the Peeres of France might give judgement of a King annointed, and therefore superi∣our? considering that a greater dignity drowneth the lesser; and now one and the same per∣son was both King of England and Duke of Normandy. But whither doe I digresse? Af∣ter Arthur, these succeeded orderly in the Earldome of Richmond. Guy Vicount of Thovars, unto whom the foresaid Constance was secondly married. Ranulph the third, Earle of Chester, the third husband of the said Constance. Peter of Dreux, descended from the bloud royall of France; who wedded Alice the onely daughter of Constance by her husband abovenamed Guy. Then upon dislike of the house of Britaine, Peter of Savoy, Unkle by the mothers side unto Eleonor the wife of king Henry the Third, was made Earle of Richmond, who for feare of the Nobles and Commons of Eng∣land that murmured against strangers preferred to honours in England, voluntarily surrendred up this Honour which was restored to Iohn Earle of Britaine, sonne to Peter of Dreux. After whom succeeded Iohn his sonne, the first Duke of Britaine, who wedded Beatrice daughter to Henry the Third King of England. Whose sonne Arthur was Duke of Britaine, Robert de Ar∣thois was not Earle of Rich∣mond as Fros∣sard writeth, but of Beau∣mont. The booke of Tenures or Fees of Rich∣mond. and as some write, Earle of Richmond. Certes, John of Britaine his younger brother, immediately after the fathers death, bare this ho∣nourable Title. And he added unto the ancient Armes of Drewx with the Canton of Britaine, the Lions of England in Bordeur. Hee was Guardian of Scotland under King Edward the Second, and there taken and detained prisoner for three yeeres space, and dyed at length without issue, in the Raigne of Edward the Third. And John Duke of Britaine, his nephew, the sonne of Arthur succeeded in this Earle∣dome. After his decease without children, when there was hote contention about the Dutchy of Britaine, betweene John Earle of Montfort of the halfe bloud, and Joane his brothers daughter and heire of the whole bloud marryed to Charles of Bloys: King Edward the Third affecting the said John Earle of Montfort, and to strengthen his owne party in France, favoured the Title of the said John Earle of Montfort for that he was a man and neerer in degree, and therefore seemed to have better right and to bee preferred before his Niece (to whom the Parliament of France had adjudged it) and which is more for that he sware fealty to him as King of France, for the Dutchy of Britaine. In these respects he granted the Earldome of Richmond unto the said Iohn untill he might recover his owne possessions in France, which being soone after recovered by aide of the English, the said King bestowed it upon Iohn of Gaunt his sonne. And he afterward surrendred it againe into the King his fathers hands for other possessions. Who forthwith created Iohn Earle of Mont∣fort Duke of Britaine sirnamed The valiant Earle of Richmond unto whom hee had given his daughter to wife, that thereby hee might more surely oblige unto him a warlique person, and then ill affected to the French. But in the fourth yeere of Ri∣chard the Second he by authority of the Parliament forfaited his Earldome because he adhered unto the French King against England: howbeit hee kept still the bare Title, and left it unto his posterity: But the possession was granted to Dame Ioane of Britaine his sister, and the widdow of Ralph Lord Basset of Draiton. After her de∣cease first Ralph Nevill Earle of Westmorland, had the Castle and Earldome of Rich∣mond for the tearme of his owne life, by the gift of King Henry the Fourth. And after him Iohn Duke of Bedford. Then king Henry the Sixth conferred the Title of Earle of Richmond upon Edmund of Hadham his halfe brother by the mothers side, with this speciall and peculiar prerogative, To take his place in Parliament next unto Dukes. After him succeeded Henry his sonne who was King of England by the name of Henry the Seventh. But during his exile George Duke of Clarence, and Richard Duke of Glocester received the Signiory of Richmond, but not the Title from their brother king Edward the Fourth. Last of all Henry the base sonne of king Henry the Eighth was by his father invested Duke of Richmond, who departed this life without issue 1535. Duke of Richmond. As for Sir Thomas Grey who was made Baron of Richmount by king Henry the Sixth, was not Lord of this Richmond, but of a place in Bedford∣shire called Rugemound, and Richmount Greies. There are contained in this Shire Parishes 104. beside Chappels. BISHOPRICK OF DVRHAM. T He Bishopricke of Durham or Duresme, bordering on the North side upon Yorke-shire is shaped in fashion of a triangle, the utmost angle whereof is made up, toward the West, where the Northren limit and the Spring-head of Tees doe meete. One of the sides which lieth Southward is bounded in with the continued course of the river Tees running downe along by it: the other that looketh Northward, is limited first, with a short line, from the utmost point to the river Derwent, then, with Derwent it selfe, untill it hath taken unto it Chopwell a little river, and afterward with the river Tine. The Sea coast fashioneth out the Base of the Triangle which li∣eth Eastward, and the German Ocean with a mighty roaring, and forcible violence beareth thereupon. On that part where it gathereth narrow to the Westerne angle, the fields are na∣ked and barren, the woods very thin, the hills bare without grasse, but not without mynes of iron. As for the Vallies, they are reasonably grassie, and that high hill which I termed the Apennine of England, cutteth in twain this angle. But on the East part or Base of the Triangle, as also on both sides, the ground being well manured, is very fruitful, and the increase yeeldeth good recompence for the husbandmans toile: it is also well garnished with meddowes, pastures, and corn-fields, beset everywhere with townes and yeelding plenty of Sea coale, which in many places we use for few∣ell. Some will have this coale to be an earthy black Bitumen, others, to be Gagates, and some againe the L pis Thracius ; all which that great Philosopher in Minerals, George Agricola, hath prooved to be one and the same thing. Surely this of ours, is nothing else but Bitumen, or a clammy kind of cley hardned with heat under the earth, and so throughly concocted: For, it yeeldeth the smell of Bitumen, and if water bee sprink∣led upon it, it burneth more vehemently and the cleerer: but, whether it may bee quenched with oile, Obsidianus lopi Canole cole▪ I have not yet tried. And if the Stone called Obsidianus be in our country, I would take that to bee it, which is found in other places of England, and commonly called Canole cole: For it is hard, bright, light, and somewhat easie to be cloven piece meale into flakes, and being once kindled it burneth very quickly. But let us leave these matters to those that search more deeply into Natures closets. All this country with other territories also thereto adjoyning the Monasticall wri∣ters tearme the Land, Saint Cuth∣berts Patri∣mony. or Patrimonie of Saint Cuthbert. For, so they called whatsoever belonged to the Church of Durham, whereof S. Cuthbert was the Patron: who in the primitive state of the English Church, being Bishop of Lindefarn, led all his life in such holinesse and so sincerely, that he was enrolled among the English Saints. Our kings also, and Peeres of the Realme, because they verily perswaded themselves that he was their Tutelar Saint and Protectour against the Scots, went not onely in Pil∣grimage with devotion to visite his body (which, they beleeved to have continued still found and uncorrupt) but also gave very large possessions to this Church, and en∣dowed the same with many immunities. King Edgfride bestowed upon Cuthbert himselfe whiles he lived, great revenewes in the very City of Yorke, and Creake also whereof I spake, and the City Luguballia, as wee reade in the History of Durham. King Aelfred and Guthrun the Dane, whom hee made Lieutenant of Nor∣thumberland, gave afterwards all the Lands betweene the Rivers Were and Tine unto Cuthbert, and to those who ministred in his Church, to have and to hold for ever, as their rightfull Possession. (These bee the very words in effect of an ancient Booke) whence they might have sufficient maintenance to live upon, and not be pinched with pover∣ty: over and besides, they ordeined his Church to bee a safe Sanctuary for all fugitives: that whosoever for any cause fled unto his Corps, should have peaceable being for 37. daies, and the same liberty never for any occasion to bee infringed or denyed. Edward and Athelstan, Kings; Knute also or Canutus the Dane, who came on his bare feete to Cuthberts Tombe, not onely confirmed but enlarged also these liberties. In like manner King William the Conquerour, since whose time it hath alwayes beene deemed a County Palatine: yea and some of the Bishops, as Counts Palatine have engraven in their seales a Knight or man at armes in compleat harnesse sitting upon an horse all trap∣ped, with one hand brandishing a sword, and in the other holding out the Armes of the Bishopricke. The Bishops also have had their royalties and princely rights, so that the goods of outlawed and attainted persons out of the Kings protection, fell into their hands and not into the Kings: yea and the Commons of that Province standing upon their pri∣viledges have refused to serve in warre under the King in Scotland. For, they plea∣ded (the Story of Duresme shall speake for mee) That they were Haliwerke folkes, and held their lands to defend the Corps of Saint Cuthbert; neither ought they to goe out of the precincts of the Bishopricke, namely beyond Tine and Teese, for King or Bishop. But King Edward the First, was the first that abridged them of these liberties. For, when as he interposed himselfe as Arbitratour betweene the Bishop Antony Bec, and the Pri∣our who contended most egerly about certaine lands, and they would not stand to his award, Hee seised, as saith mine Authour, the liberty of the Bishopricke into his owne hand, and there were many corners searched, many flawes found, and the Liberty in many points much impaired. Howbeit, the Church afterward recovered her rights, and held them inviolate unto the daies of King Edward the Sixth, unto whom, upon the dis∣solution of the Bishopricke, the States in Parliament granted all the revenewes and liberties thereof. But forthwith Queene Mary by the same authority repealed this Act, and restored all things safe and sound unto the Church againe, which it en∣joyeth at this day. For, the Bishop, James Pilkinton of late time entred his action against Queene Elizabeth, about the possessions and goods of Charles Nevill Earle of Westmorland and of others that stood attainted for treason in this precinct, because they had most wickedly levied warre against their native Country: and he the said Bishop had followed the suit to a triall, if the authority of Parliament had not in∣terposed and adjudged the same for that time, unto the Queene, because to her ex∣ceeding great charges she had delivered both Bishop and Bishopricke from the out∣rage of the Rebels. But leaving these matters, let us proceed forward to the de∣scripton of places. The riuer that boundeth the South part of this country, is called by Latin writers Teisis, The River Teise, or Teisis. and Teesa, commonly Tees: by Polydore Virgill the Italian (whose minde ranne of Athesis in his owne country Italy) without any reason, Athesis. In Ptolomee it see∣meth to be called, and : and yet I thinke that in him it is removed out of his proper place through the negligence of transcribers. For, considering that he hath placed TUESIS and TINA in the more remote part of Britaine, where the Scots now inhabite; and seeing that this Region is enclosed within Tees and Tine ; If I durst, as a Criticke, correct that ancient Geographer, I would recall them home againe hither into their owne places, though they have been long displaced, and that with the Scots good leave I hope, who have no Rivers upon which they can truely father these names. TEES springeth out of that stony country called Stanemore, and carrying with him away in his chanell along, many brookes and beckes on each side, and running through rockes (out of which at Egleston, where there is a marble Quar∣roy, and where Conan Earle of Britaine, and Richmond founded a small Abbay) first beateth upon Bernard Castle, built and so named by Bernard Balliol the great grand∣fathers father of John Balliol King of the Scots. But this John Balliol, whom King Ed∣ward the First had declared King of Scotland, lost the same with other his possessions, because he had broken his alleageance which he sware unto Edward. At which time the King being highly displeased with Antony Bishop of Durrham, tooke this Castle (as witnesseth the booke of Duresme) with the appertinences thereto from him, and con∣ferred the same upon the Earle of Warwicke: as Herkes also and Hertnes, which hee gave unto Robert Clifford: Kewerston also, which hee bestowed upon Geffrey of Hertpole, which the Bishop had by the forfeiture of Iohn Baliol, Robert Bruse, and Christopher Seton. But a few yeeres after, Lewis Beaumount the Bishop, a man royally descended, but alto∣gether unlettered, brought his action for this Castle and the rest of those possessions, and obtained his suite, by vertue of judgement given in this tenour, The Bishop of Durham ought to have the forfeiture of Warres within the Liberties of his Bishopricke, as the King hath it without. Stretlham. Hard by it is Stretlham seene, where dwelt for a long time the worshipfull family of the Bowes, Bowes. Knights: who from time to time in the greatest troubles have performed passing good service to Prince and Country: and derive their pedigree from W. de Bowes, unto whom, as I have read, Alanus Niger Earle of Britaine and Richmond granted, that hee might give for his Armes, The Ermin. Scutcheon of Britaine with three bent Bowes therein. Not full five miles from hence, standeth somewhat farther from Tees banke Stan∣drop, which also is called Stainthorpe, that is, Stony Village, a little Mercate Towne, where there was a Collegiat Church, founded by the Nevills, and was their Buri∣all-place. Neere unto it is Raby, Raby Castle. whch Cnut or Canute the Danish King gave free∣ly unto the Church of Durham together with the land lying round about it, and Stanthorpe, to be held for ever. Since which time, as mine Authour informeth mee, The Family of the Nevills, or De nova villa, held Raby of the Church, paying yeerely for it foure pounds and a Stagge. The family of the Nevils. These Nevilles deduce their Descent from Waltheof Earle of Northumberland, out of whose posterity, when Robert the sonne of Mal∣dred, See in West∣morland. Lord of Raby had married the daughter of Geffrey Nevill the Norman (whose Grandsire Gilbert Nevill is reported to have beene Admirall to King William the Conquerour) their succeeding Progeny tooke unto them the name of Nevilles, and grew up into a most numerous honourable, and mighty house: who erected heere a great and spacious Castle, which was the first and principall seate. These two places Stainthorpe and Raby are severed one from another onely by a little rill which after some few miles runneth into Tees, neere unto Selaby, where now is the habi∣tation of the Brakenburies, Selaby. a Family of right good note both in regard of their owne Antiquity, as also for their marriages contracted with the heires of Denton and of Wicliff. Tees passing on from thence by Sockburne, the dwelling house of the ancient and noble Family of the Coigniers, Barons Coig∣niers. out of which were the Barons Coigniers of Horn∣by (whose inheritance much bettered by matching in marriage with the heires of the Lord Darcy of Metnill, and of William Nevill Earle of Kent, and Lord of Fau∣conberg, is descended from them in the memory of our fathers, to the Atherstons and the Darcies ) holdeth his course neere unto Derlington, Derlington. a Mercate Towne of good resort, which Seir, an English Saxon the sonne of Ulph, having obtained leave of King Etheldred gave unto the Church of Durham: and Hugh Pudsey adorned it with a faire Church and other edifices. In this Towne field are three pittes of a wonderfull depth, the common people tearme them Hell-Kettles, Hell Kettles, Deepe pits. because the water in them by the Antiperistasis or rever∣beration of the cold aire striking thereupon, waxeth hote. The wiser sort and men of better judgement doe thinke, they came by the sinking downe of the ground swallowed up in some earth-quake, Earth-quake. and that by a good probable reason. For, thus we reade in the Chronicles of Tinmouth. In the yeere of our Lord 1179. on Christmas day, at Oxenhall in the Territory of Derlington, within the Bishopricke of Durham, the ground heaved it selfe up aloft like unto an high Towre, and so continued all that day as it were unmoveable, untill the evening: and then, fell with so horrible a noise, that it made all the neighbour dwellers afraide: and the earth swallowed it up and made in the same place a deepe pit, which is there to bee seene for a testimony, unto this day. That these Pittes have passages under the ground Bishop Cuthbert Tonstall first observed, by finding that Goose in the River Tees, which he for the better triall and experience of these Pits, had marked and let downe into them. Beyond Derlington, Certaine Gen∣tlemen called Sur. Tees hath no Townes of any great account standing upon it, but gliding along the skirtes of greene fields, Teis i. upon Teis, sometime flourished here. and by country Villages, winding in and out as he passeth; at length dischargeth himselfe at a large mouth into the Oce∣an, whence the base or bothom of the Triangle aforesaid towards the Sea be∣ginneth. From hence the shore coasteth Northward, holding on entire still, save that it is interrupted with one or two little Brookes and no more, Gretham. neere unto Gretham ; where Robert Bishop of Durham having the Manour given freely unto him by Sir Peter de Montfort, founded a goodly Hospitall. Next unto it is Claxton, which gave name unto a Family of good and ancient note, in this Tract: whereof, I have beene the more willing to make mention, because of the same house was T. Claxton, an affectionate lover of venerable Antiquity. From thence, the shore shooteth forth into the Sea with one onely Promontory scarce seven miles above Tees mouth, on which standeth very commodiously Hartlepoole, Hartlepoole. a good Towne of trade, and a safe harbour for shipping. Bede seemeth to call it , which Henry of Huntingdon, interpreteth The Harts or Stagges Island, where hee writeth, that Heiu a religious wo∣man founded a Monastery in times past. If Heorteu bee not rather the name of that little Territory, which the Booke of D resme seemeth to implie and in another place calleth Heortnesse, A Promontory in our language is called Nesse. because it lyeth out somewhat farre into the Sea. From this for fifteene miles together the shore being in no place broken off, but heere and there embroidered as it were and garnished with Townes, smileth pleasantly upon those that saile that way, untill it openeth it selfe to make roome for the River VE∣DRA; for, The river Ve∣dra, or Were. so Ptolomee calleth that, which Bede nameth Wirus, the Saxons ; and we Were. This river first groweth into one out of three riverets Burden-hop, Wel-hop, and Kel-hop, in the utmost part of this Country Westward: which when they are joyned in one chanell is called by one name Were, and speedeth into the East, by vast moores and heathes, Witton. by great Parkes of the Bishops, and by Witton a little Castle or pile belonging to the Lords Evers, Barons Evers. or D'Eure. who are Noblemen in this Country of great an∣tiquity, as descended from the Lords of Clavering and Warkworth, as also from the Vescyes and the Attons, by Daughters: renowned for their martiall prowesse, which Scotland may well witnesse. For, King Edward the First, gave unto them for their valiant service Kettnes a little Towne in Scotland, and King Henry the Eighth within our fathers remembrance honoured them in that respect with the Title of Barons. Then Were after a few miles taketh into him from the South Gaunlesse a Riveret; where, at the very meeting of them both together, there standeth upon an high hill Aukland so called of Okes (like as Sarron in Greece) which sheweth an house of the Bishops stately built with Turrets by Antony Bec, Auk-land. and withall a beautifull Bridge, made by Walter Skirlaw a Bishop of Durham about the yeere 1400. who also en∣larged this house and built the Bridge over Tees at Yare. From hence Were turneth his course Northward, that he might water this shire the longer, and then forthwith looketh up to the remaines of an ancient City not now a dying, but dead many yeeres agoe, standing on the brow of an hill: which Antonine the Emperour called VINOVIUM, Vinovium. Ptolomee BINOVIUM, in whom it is so thrust out of his owne place, and set as it were in another Climate, that it would for ever have lien hid, had not Antonine pointed at it with his finger. Binchester. Wee call it at this day Binchester, and it hath in it a very few houses: yet it is very well knowne to them that dwell thereabout, both by reason of the heapes of rubbish, and the reliques of walles yet to be seene, as also for peeces of Romane Coine often digged up there, which they call Bin∣chester Penies, yea and for the Inscriptions of the Romanes, amongst which I happe∣ned of late when I was there upon an Altar with this Inscription. DE AB. As concerning the Mother Goddesses. See in Lanca∣shire. MATRIB. Q. LO—CL. QUIN TIANUS—COS V. S. L. M. Anno Christi. 236. Votum solvit. li ben. merito .i. Paid his vow willingly and duly. Another stone also was heere lately gotten out of the ground, but defaced with voide places, where the letters were worne out: which notwithstanding, if one beheld it wishly, seemeth to shew this Inscription. — — TRIB. COHOR. I. CARTOV— MARTI VICTORI GENIO LOCI. ET BONO EVENTUI. Neither have I read any thing else of it, but that an old booke maketh mention, how the Earles of Northumberland, long since plucked away this with other Villa∣ges from the Church, what time as that accursed and unsatiable hunger after Gold swallowed up also the sacred patrimony of the Church. On the other banke of Were, Branspath Castle. among the mounting Hilles appeareth Branspeth Castle, which the Bulmers built, and the daughter of Sir Bertram Bulmer coupled in marriage unto Geffrey Nevill, adjoyned with other great Possessions unto the Family of the Nevills. Within a while after Were runneth downe much trou∣bled and hindered in his Course with many great Stones apparent above the wa∣ter, which unlesse the River doe rise and swell with great store of raine, are ne∣ver over covered: and upon which (a thing that happeneth not elsewhere) if yee powre water, and temper it a little with them, it sucketh in a saltish quality. Nay, that which more is, at Butterby a little Village, when the River in Summer time is very ebbe and shallow, Salt stones. there issueth out of those stones a certaine salt reddish wa∣ter, which by the heat of the Sunne waxeth so white, and withall groweth to a thicke substance, that the people dwelling thereby gather from hence salt sufficient∣ly for their use. And now the River, as though it purposed to make an Island, compasseth almost on every side the chiefe City of this Province standing on an hill, whence the Saxons gave it the name Dunholm. For, as you may gather out of Bede, they called an hill Dun, and a river Island Holme. Dunelmus. Durham, or Duresme. Heereof, the Latine Writers have made DUNEL∣MUM, the Normans Duresme, but the common people most corruptly name it Durham. It is seated on high, and passing strongly withall, yet taketh it up no great circuit of ground; shaped in forme, as one would say, of an egge, environed on eve∣ry side save on the North with the River, and fortified with a wall. Toward the South side almost, whereas the River fetcheth it selfe about, standeth the Cathe∣drall Church aloft, making a solemne and a sightly shew with an high Towre in the middest and two Spires at the West end. In the middest there is a Castle placed, as it were betweene two stone bridges o∣ver the river, the one Eastward, the other Westward. From the Castle Northward is seene a spacious Mercate-place and Saint Nicholas Church: from whence there runneth out a great length North-East a Suburbe compassed on two sides the Ri∣ver: like as others on both sides beyond the River, which leade unto the Bridges, and euery of them have their severall Churches. The originall of this City is of no great Antiquity. For, when the distressed Monkes of Lindisfarn driven hither, and thither by the Danes Warres, wandered up and downe without any certaine place of abode with the corps of Saint Cuthbert, at length heere they setled them∣selves by divine direction, about the yeere of our Salvation 995. But heare the whole matter out of mine Authour of Durham. All the people accompanying the corps of that most holy Father Cuthbert came into Dunholme, a place verily strong of it selfe by nature, but not easily to bee inhabited, as being wholly beset on every side with a most thicke Wood: onely in the middest was a little Plaine, which was wont to bee tilled and sowed with Corne: where Bishop Aldwin built afterwards a faire Church of stone. The foresaid Prelate therefore, through the helpe of all the people and the assistance of Uthred Earle of Northumberland, stocked up all the Wood and in short time made the whole place habita∣ble. To conclude, the people generally from the River Coqued as farre as to Tees, came right willingly, as well to this worke, as after that to build a Church: and untill it was fini∣shed ceased not to follow that businesse devoutly. Wherefore after the Wood was quite grub'd up, and every one had their mansion places assigned out by lot; The said Bishop in a fervent love to Christ and Saint Cuthbert, upon an honest and godly intent beganne (no small peece of worke) to build a Church, and endeavoured by all meanes to finish the same. Thus farre mine Authour. Not many yeeres after, those Englishmen who could not endure the insolent command of the Normans, presuming upon the naturall strength of the place, chose it for their chiefe Hold and seat of resistance, yea and from thence troubled the Conquerour not a little. For, William Gemeticensis writeth thus. They went into a part of the Country which for waters and woods was inaccessible, raising a Castle with a most strong trench and rampier, which they called Dunholme: out of which making many rodes sundry waies, for a certaine space they kept themselves close there, waiting for the comming of Swene King of the Danes. But when that fell not out according to their expectation, they provided for themselves by flight: and King William comming to Durham, granted many priviledges for establishing the liberty of the Church, and built the Castle whereof I spake, on the highest part of the hill, which afterwards became the Bishops house: and the keies thereof when the Bishopricke was voide, were wont by an ancient custome to be hanged upon Saint Cuthberts shrine. When this Castle was once built, William of Malmesbury who lived about that time, describeth this City in these words. Durham is a prety hill rising by little and little from one plaine of the Valley with a gentle ascent, untill it come to bee a mount: and al∣though by reason of the rough and steepe situation of the Rockes, there is no way for the ene∣my to enter it; yet they of these daies have erected a Castle upon the hill. At the very foote and bottom of the Castle, runneth a River, wherein is great store of fish, but of Salmons espe∣cially. At the same time well neere (as that ancient Booke reporteth) William de Careleph the Bishop, who gathered againe the dispersed Monkes hither (for, the Danes in every place had overthrowne their Cloistures) pulled downe that Church which Aldwin had formerly built, and beganne the foundation of another of a fairer worke, which his successour Ralph finished. And after that, Nicholas Feruham Bi∣shop, and Thomas Mescomb Prior, adjoyned a new Fabrique or frame unto it, in the yeere of Christ 1242. And a good while after, W. Skirlaw the Bishop, built at the West end of the Church a faire peece of worke which they call Galli∣lee, Gallilee. whereinto hee translated the marble Tombe of Venerable Bede. In which place Hugh Pudsey, beganne in times past an house, wherein (I use the words of an ancient Booke) women might lawfully enter, For no woman might enter in∣to Durham Church. that whereas they had not corporall accesse unto the more secret holy places; yet they might have some comfort by the beholding of the holy mysteries. But, that Ralph the Bishop aforesaid, as our Historian writeth, reduced the place etweene the Church and the Castle, which had beene taken up with many dwelling houses, into a plaine and open ground; for feare least either any annoyance by filth, or dangers by fire, might come neere unto the Church. And all be it the City was strong enough by the na∣turall site, yet hee made it more strong, and stately with a Wall, reaching in length from the Chauncell of the Church, unto the Keepe and Towre of the Castle: Which wall now by little and little giveth place unto time, and never that I could heare, suffered any assault of enemy. For, when David Brus, King of Scots, had forraied the Country with fire and sword, Beere-parke. 1346. as farre as to Beanparke or Beereparke, which is a Parke neere unto the City, whiles King Edward the Third besieged Calais, Henry Percy and William Zouch Archbishop of Yorke, with their Companies of men mustered up in haste, encoun∣tered the Scots, and so couragiously charged them, that having taken the King pri∣soner they slew the most of the first and second battaile; and put the third to a fearefull flight: neither staied they at most steepe and cumbersome places, un∣till they recovered their owne Holds. This is that famous Battaile, which our people call The Battaile at Nevils Crosse. Battaile of Nevils Crosse For, the chiefest of the Scottish Nobility being slaine, and the King taken prisoner at this field, they were enforced to yeeld much ground within their Confines, yea and to render many Castles. But this may suf∣fice as touching Durham: which I will take my leave of, if you thinke good, with a Distichon of Necham, and an Hexastichon of John Jonston. Arte, sitúque loci munita Dunelmia salve, Qua floret sancta religionis apex. VEDRA ruens rapidis modò cursibus, agmine leni, Séque minor celebres suspicit urbe viros, Quos dedit ipsa olim, quorum & tegit ossa sepulta; Magnus ubi sacro marmore BEDA cubat. Se jactant aliae vel religione, vel armis; Haec armis cluit, haec religione potens. Durham by art and site of place well fensed now farewell, Where for devout Religion the Mitre doth excell. The River Were that ranne most swift ere while, with streame now soft And chanell lesse, to famous men in towne lookes up aloft; Whom once it bred: and of whose bones in grave it is possest: Where under sacred marble stone, Great Beda now doth rest. Of Armes or of Religion, may other boast, I grant: For Armes and for Religion both, this City makes her vaunt. Concerning the Monkes that were cast out at the suppression of the Abbaies, the twelve Prebendaries and two Arch-Deacons placed in this Church, and the Pri∣ours name changed into the Dignity of a Deane, I neede not to say any thing: for, they are yet in fresh memory. And unwilling I am to remember how this Bi∣shopricke was dissolved by a private Statute, and all the possessions thereof given to Edward the Sixth, when private greedinesse edged by Church-men did grinde the Church, and withdrew much from God, wherewith Christian Piety had for∣merly honoured God. But Queene Mary repealed that Statute and restored the said Bishopricke with all the Possessions, and Franchises thereof, that God might enjoy his owne. The Longitude of this City is 22. Degrees. The Latitude 54. Degrees and 57. minutes. Beneath Durham, that I many not overpasse it, Shrirburne Hospitall. standeth Eastward a very faire Hospitall, which Hugh Pudsey that most wealthy Bishop, and Earle of Northum∣berland, so long as it was, Being very indulgently compassionate to Lepres (as Neu∣brigensis writeth) built with coste (I must needes say profuse enough) but in some sort not so honest: as who layed no small deall of other mens right (so great was his power) upon this devotion, whiles hee thought much to disburse sufficient of his owne. Howbeit hee assigned unto it revenewes to maintaine threescore and five Lepres, besides Masse Priests. From Durham Were carrieth his streame Northward with a more direct course, by Finchdale ; Finchdale. where, in the Reigne of King Henry the Second Goodrick a man of the ancient Christian simplicity, and austerity wholly devoted to the service of God, led a solitary life and ended his daies: being buried in the same place, wherein, as that William of Neuborrow saith, hee was wont either to lye prostrate whiles he prayed, or to lay him downe when he was sicke. Who with this his devout simplicity, drew men into so great an admiration of him, that R. brother unto that rich Bishop Hugh Pudsey built a Chappell in memoriall of him. Lumley. Barons Lum∣ley. From thence Were passeth by Lumley Castle standing within a Parke, the ancient seat of the Lumleies, who descended from Liulph, a man in this tract of right great Nobility in the time of King Edward the Confessour, who marryed Aldgitha the daughter of Aldred Earle of Northumberland. Of these Lumleies, Marmaduke as∣sumed unto him his mothers Coate of Armes (in whose right hee was seized of a goodly inheritance of the Thwengs ) namely, Argent of Fesse Gueles betweene three Poppinjaes Vert, whereas the Lumleies before time had borne for their Armes, Six Pop∣pinjaes Argent, in Gueles. For she was the eldest daughter of Sir Marmaduke Thweng Lord of Kilton, and one of the heires of Thomas Thweng her brother. But Ralph sonne to the said Marmaduke was the first Baron Lumley, created by King Richard the Second: which honour John the ninth from him enjoyed in our daies a man most honourable for all the ornaments of true Nobility. Just over against this place, not farre from the other banke of the River standeth Chester upon the Street, Chester upon the street. Condercum. as one would say, the Castle or little City by the Port way side: the Saxons called it : whereupon, I would deeme it to be CONDERCUM, in which as the booke of Notices recordeth, the first wing of the Astures, in the Ro∣manes time kept station and lay in Garison, within the Line or precinct (as that booke saith) of the WALL. For it is but a few miles distant from that famous WALL, whereof I am to speake heereafter. The Bishops of Lindifarre lived ob∣scurely heere with the corps of Saint Cuthbert, whiles the raging stormes of the Danes were up, for the space of an hundred and thirteene yeeres. In memory whereof, when Egelricke Bishop of Durham layed the foundation of a new Church in that place, he found such a mighty masse of money buried within the ground, as is thought by the Romans, that wallowing now in wealth, he gave over his Bishopricke: and being returned to Peterborrow whereof hee had beene Abbot before, made cau∣seies through the Fennes and raised other Workes, not without exceeding great charges. And a long time after Anthony Bec, Bishop of Durham and Patriarch of Jerusalem erected heere a Collegiat Church, a Deane, and seven Prebends. In which Church, the Lord Lumley abovesaid placed and ranged in goodly order the Monuments of his Ancestours in a continued line of succession even from Liulph unto these our daies; which he had either gotten together out of Monasteries that were subverted, or caused to bee made a new. And further within, almost in the middest of the Tri∣angle, there is another little Village also knowne of late by reason of the College of a Deane and Prebendaries founded by that Antony Bec at Lanchester, which I once thought to have beene LONGOVICUM a station of the Romanes. But let us returne unto Were, which now at length turneth his course Eastward, and running beside Hilton a Castle of the Hiltons, Hilton Castle. a Family of ancient Gentry; venteth his waters with a vast mouth into the sea at Wiran-muth, as Bede tearmeth it, now named Monkes Were-mouth, because it belonged to the Monkes. Touching which mouth or out-let, thus writeth William of Malmesbury. This Were where hee entereth into the Sea, entertaineth Shippes brought in with a faire Gale of Winde, within the gentle and quiet bosome of his Out-let. Both the Bankes whereof, Benedict Bishop beautified with Churches and built Abbaies there, one in the name of Saint Peter and the other of Saint Paul. The painfull industry of this man hee will wonder at, who shall reade his life; for that hee brought hither great store of bookes, and was the first man that ever procured Masons and Glasiers for windowes to come into England. Glasiers, first in England. Five miles higher, the River Tine doth also unlade it selfe, which together with Derwent for a good way lineth out (as it were) the North side of this Country. Up∣on Derwent which hath his spring head neere unto the top of the Triangle, there standeth nothing of note, Ebchester. Saint Ebba. unlesse it bee a little Village which now they call Ebche∣ster, of Ebba a virgin of the bloud royall of the Northumbers, of whom there went so great a name and opinion for her sanctimony and devotion about the yeere 630. that being canonized among the Saints, she hath many Churches in this Island de∣dicated unto her, Saint Tabbs. which the common sort usually call Saint Tabbs for Saint Ebbes. But by Tine there is situate a memorable Towne called Gateshead in the English Saxon tongue , and by Latin Historians, Caprae Caput, which is the same, as one would say, Goates head: and is as it were the Suburbs of Newcastle, standing on the hether side of Tine, whereunto also it was annexed by King Edward the Sixth, when the Bishopricke was dissolved. But Queene Mary soone after restored it a∣gaine unto the Church. The common people thinke it is farre more ancient than Newcastle it selfe. And if I also should say, that this and Newcastle together (for one Towne it may seeme in old time to have beene, divided onely by the River) was that Frontier Station, which under the later Emperours they called GABRO∣SENTUM, and was kept by the second Band of the Thracians, and that it retai∣ned still the ancient name in sense and signification, whereas, New-castle hath got∣ten once or twice a new name, I hope my opinion would be nothing dissonant from the truth: For, Gaffr in the British tongue signifieth a Goat, and Hen in ordinary speech is used for Pen, which betokeneth an Head: and in the very same signification our old Historiographers tearme it in Latine Caprae Caput, like as Brundusium, in the Messapians Language tooke that name, from a Stagges head. I would thinke that this name was given unto this place, by occasion of some Inne that had a Goats head for the signe: even as Gallus Gallinaccus, that is, The Housecocke, Tres Sorores, that is, Three sisters, and Pirum, that is, The Peare, Places in Africke, Spaine, and Italie, whereof An∣tonine maketh mention: which, of such signes (as some learned men suppose) tooke their names. And our Historians all with one accord, name this Towne Caprae Caput, when they record, that Walcher Bishop of Durham, whom King William the First had made Governour over Northumberland with the authority of an Earle, was slaine in this place by the furious multitude, for misgoverning the Country. Beneath this Towne, Girwy. Iarrow. Bede. almost at the very mouth of Tine, is to be seene Girwy, now Iarrow, the native soile of venerable Bede, where also in ancient times flourished a little Monastery: The Founder whereof and the time of the foundation, this in∣scription sheweth, which is yet extant in the Church wall. DEDICATIO BASILICAE S. PAULI VIII. KL. MA II. ANNO XVI. ECFRIDI REG. CEOLFRIDI ABB. EIUSDEMQ. ECCLES. DEO AUCTORE, CONDITORIS ANNO IIII. These greater Churches when the Saving light of Christ shone upon the world (let it not seeme impertinent to note so much by occasion of the word Basilica ) were termed BASILICAE, Basilicae. for that the Basilicae of the Gentiles which were large and spa∣tious Hauls, wherein Magistrates sat in judgement and ministred Justice, were con∣verted into Christian Churches. Whence Ausonius wrote thus, Basilica olim nego∣tijs plena, &c. The Basilica [or Haull of Justice] in times past full of businesses, is now as full of Praiers and vowes: or else because they were built in forme somewhat long, in manner of those Basilicae. Saint Bede. Heere our Bede, the singular glory and ornament of England, who for his Piety and learning got the sirname of VENERABILIS, bestowed all diligence, as him∣selfe saith, in meditation of the Scriptures, and amid the most boisterous billowes and surging waves of Barbarisme wrote many most learned Volumes. When hee was once dead, there was buried with him, as William of Malmesbury saith, all the knowledge, well neere of Acts and Monuments, untill our time. For, when there succeeded ever one more lazie than another, the heat of good studies was abated, and cooled through the whole Land. And the Danes for their part, plagued this holy place in such wise, that short∣ly after the Conquest, when some in these Countries went in hand to reestablish the Monkes againe, and Walcher the Bishop assigned this place for them: Onely walles, as saith mine Authour, were standing without any roofe, and it scarcely retained any signe of the ancient dignity: howbeit for all that, they framing a roofe over head of rough hewen wood such as they could get, and thatching it with straw, beganne to celebrate Divine Ser∣vice therein. Bishops of Durham. I neede not to make a Catalogue of the Bishops of Durham who are reputed Count-Palatines. Let it suffice to intimate thus much, that since the first time, a See was heere erected, in the yeere of our Redemption 995. there have sitten in it 35. Bishops unto our daies. Of which these were most eminent: Hugh Pudsey nobly descended, and allyed to King Stephen: who for a thousand and thirteene pounds pre∣sently disbursed, purchased of King Richard the First, the Country of Northumber∣land for his life; See the Earles of Northum∣berland. and Sathbrege, to his successours for ever, and built that goodly Ho∣spitall whereof I spake: betweene whom and the Archbishop there arose a most bitter controversie, Whiles (as he writeth of them) hic praesse, ille non subesse, & neuter prodesse contenderet, that is, One would bee superiour, the other would not bee inferiour, and neither of them would doe any good. Antony Bec, Patriarch of Jerusalem, who spent infinite summes of money, upon vast buildings, and glorious furniture. Thomas Wolsey Cardinall, who in his high prosperity wanted nothing but moderation (but his History is sufficiently knowne.) And Cuthbert Tunstall, who dyed in our time, for singular knowledge in the best Sciences, sincere holinesse of life, and great wis∣dome approved in domesticall, and forraigne imployments, was (without offence bee it spoken) equivalent to them all, and a singular Ornament to his native Coun∣trie. In this Province and in Northumberland beside very many Chappels, are counted Parish Churches 118. LANCASTRIAE Comitalus palatinus olim pars BRIGANTUM LANCA-SHIRE. I Must now turne the course of my journey another way, unto the rest of the BRIGANTES, who were planted on the farther side of the Hilles toward the Irish Sea: and first un∣to LANCA-SHIRE, which I goe unto (God speede mee well) after a sort somewhat against my will: For I feare me that I shall not satisfie my selfe, and much lesse the Reader. For very few things fell out to my desire, when I travailed over the greatest part thereof, the old names in every place have beene so worne out by the continuall assault of Time. But least I might bee thought to neglect the hearty good Lanca-shire men, I will proceed, in hope that Gods assistance, which hitherto hath beene favourable unto me, will not now faile me. Under those mountaines, which (as I have often said heeretofore) shoote along through the middle of England, and interpose themselves as umpires and Bounders betweene divers shires, Lanca-shire lyeth toward the West, in the English Saxon tongue , commonly termed Lonka-shire, Lanca-shire, and The County Palatine of Lancaster, because it is notably knowne by the title of a County Palatine. It is so enclosed betweene Yorke-shire on the East side, and the Irish sea on the West, that on the South side where it boundeth upon Cheshire it is broader, and by little and lit∣tle the more Northward it goeth, where it confineth upon Westmorland, the narrower it groweth. And there, by an Arme of the sea insinuating it selfe, is interrupted, and hath a good part of it which butteth upon Cumberland, beyond the said Arme. Where the ground is plaine and champion, it yeeldeth good store of Barly and Wheat: that which lieth at the botom of the hilles, is better for Otes: The soile e∣very where is meetely good and tolerable, unlesse it be in certaine moist places and unwholsome called Mosses, Mosses. which notwithstanding make amends for these their discommodities, with more plentifull commodities. For, if their upper coate bee pared away, they yeeld certaine unctuous or fattish Cespites. Turffes for fewell, and some times under-ground trees, or which have lien a long time buried there. Underneath also in divers places they affourd abundance of marle, which serveth in stead of mucke to enrich their grounds. Whereby, the soile that in mans opinion was held most unapt to beare Corne, beginneth now to be so kinde and arable, that it may be justly thought, mens idlenesse in times past was greater than any naturall barrainesse of the soile. But a man may judge of the goodnesse of the soile, partly by the consti∣tution and complexion of the Inhabitants, who are to see to, passing faire and beau∣tifull, and in part, if you please, by the Cattaile. For, Lanca-shire b ufes. in their Kine and Oxen which have goodly heads and faire spread hornes, and are in body well proportionate with∣all, you shall finde in manner no one point wanting, that Mago the Carthaginian doth require, as Columella specifieth out of him. On the South part, it is separated from Cheshire with the River Mersey which springing forth of the midland hilles, having passed a little from his head, becom∣meth a bound to distinguish the Shires, and with a slow current runneth Westward, calling as it were, other rivers (to use the words of the Poet) into his skie coloured and azure lappe, and forthwith gladly biddeth welcome unto Irwell from the North, which river bringeth along with him all the rivers of this Easterne part. Among these, Roch is of greatest name, Rochdale. which hath standing upon it in the Vale, Rochdale a Mer∣cate Towne well frequented; like as Irwell it selfe hath situate upon it Bury a Mercate Towne nothing inferiour to the other: and hard by, whiles I carefully sought for COCCIUM, Cockley. mentioned by Antonine the Emperour, I saw Cockley, a Chapell built of timber, beset round about with trees: Also Turton Chapell among very steepe downfalls, and overgrowne unpleasant places: Turton Towre, and Entweissoll a pro∣per faire house: which had in times past Gentlemen of that name, as Turton is the seate at this day of the right ancient family of Orell. But, where Irke and Irwell meet together, on the left hand banke raised of a reddish kinde of stone, scarce three miles from Mersey, flourished that Towne of right great antiquity which we now call Man∣chester, and Antonine the Emperour called MANCUNIUM, Mancunium. and MANUCIUM, according to the variety of the Copies. This retaining the first part of his ancient name, farre excelleth the Townes lying round about it, for the beautifull shew it car∣rieth, for resort unto it, and for clothing: in regard also of the Mercate-place, the faire Church, and College, founded by Thomas Lord De-la-ware, a Priest (the last heire male of his Family) and summoned to the Parliament among the Lords Temporall by the name of Magister Thomas de-la-ware. For he descended from the Greleies, who were the ancient Lords of this Towne, and by Ioane sister of the said Sir Thomas, it came to Wests now Lords De-la-ware. But, in the foregoing age, this Towne was of farre greater account, both for certaine wollen clothes there wrought and in great request commonly called Manchester Cottons, and also for the liberty of a Sanctuary, which under King Henry the Eighth, was by Parliamentary authority, translated to Chester. In a Parke of the Earle of Derbies neere adjoyning, called Alparke, where the Brooke Medlocke entreth into Irwell, I saw the plot and ground∣worke of an ancient Fortresse built foure square, commonly called Mancastle: which I will not in any wise say, was that ancient MANCUNIUM, it is contained in so narrow a peece of ground, but rather the Fort of Mancunium, and station of the Romanes where they kept watch and ward: at which I saw this ancient In∣scription in a long stone to the memory of Candidus a Centurion. Centurionis, CANDIDI FIDES XX. IIII. As for this other; Iohn Dee that most famous Mathematician, and Warden of Manchester College, who had a sight of the same heere, copied it out for me. COHO. I. FRISIN MASA VONIS P. XXIII. Both which may seeme erected in honour of those Centurious, for their loyalty and honesty so many yeeres approoved. In the yeere of our Salvation 920. King Edward the Elder, as Marianus writeth, sent an Army of Mercians into Northumberland, To reedifie the City of Manchester, and to place a Garison there (for it belonged formerly unto the Kings of Northum∣berland) and seemeth to have beene quite destroyed in the Danish warre: against whom, because the inhabitants had borne themselves as valiant men, they will have their towne to be called Manchester, that is, as they expound it, The City of Men, and in this conceit which implieth their owne commendation, they wonderfully please and flatter themselves. But full little know the good honest men, that MANCU∣NIUM was the name of it in the Britans time, so that the Etymologie thereof, out of our English tongue, can by no meanes seeme probable. I for my part therefore would derive it rather from Main a British word which signifieth a Stone: For, upon a stony hill it is seated, and beneath the very Towne, at Colyhurst, there are ve∣ry good and famous quarries of stone. But, to returne againe. Mersey now by this time carrying a fuller streame by rea∣son of Irwell consociating with him, holdeth on in his journey toward the Ocean, by Trafford, Trafford. from whence the Traffords a Family of great good note tooke their name as they had their habitation: also by Chatmosse, a low mossie ground, lying a great way in length and bredth: a good part whereof, the Brookes swelling high within our fathers remembrance carried quite away with them not without much danger: Whereby, the Rivers were corrupted, and a number of fresh fish perished. In which place now lyeth a Vale somewhat low, watered with a little Brooke, and trees have beene discovered lying along. So that it may be thought, when the ground lay neg∣lected, and the chanels were not skoured in those open and flat Valleies for riverets and Brookes to passe away, but the water-lades stopped up either through negli∣gence, or depopulation: that then all the grounds that lay lower than others, be∣came such boggy plots, Mosses when they come. as we call Mosses, or else standing Meeres. Which if it bee true, wee neede not mervaile that so many trees in the like places every where throughout England (but in this shire especially) lie overwhelmed, and as it were, bu∣ried. For, when their rootes were loosened through over much moisture, the trees could not chuse but fall, and in such soft ground sinke and bee quite swallowed up. They that dwell thereabouts, assay and try with poles and spits, where they lie hid∣den, and when they light upon them marke the place, digge them out, and use them for fire wood: For they burne cleere and give light, as well as torch wood, which haply is by reason of a bituminous and clammy fat earth wherein they lye: whence the common sort take them for Firres: Firre trees in Caesars time grew not in Britaine. which notwithstanding Caesar denieth to have growne in Britaine. I know it is an opinion currant with the most, that these trees overturned with the force of waters, have lien ever since Noahs Floud, when the World was drowned, and so much the rather, because they are elsewhere dig∣ged out of very high places: and yet they deny not, but those high grounds are very marish and waterish. Such mighty trees also are found oftentimes in Holland, a Country of Germany: which the learned men there, suppose were either undermined by waves working into the shore, or by windes driven forward and brought unto those lower and moist places; where they setled and sunke downe. But let the curious company of Philo∣sophers search into these matters to whom I commend them, and to their further inquirie, whether there are not Subterranean trees growing under earth, as well as plants and other Creatures. After Chatmosse, Holcroft sheweth it selfe, which, as it af∣forded the seat, Holecroft. so it gave the name also, to that right ancient family of the Holcrofts: whose estate in old time was much amended by marriage with one of the heires of Culchit a place seated hard by, which Gilbert de Culchit held, Of the Fee of Almaricke Butler, as hee himselfe did of the Earle of Ferrars, in King Henry the Third his time. Whose eldest daughter and heire, when Richard Fitz-Hugh of Hindley had married, he assumed to himselfe the name of Culchith: like as his brother Thomas, who wedded the second daughter, was of the possession, called Holcroft: another also by the same reason was named de Peasfalong, and a fourth de Riseley. Which I note, that the Reader may understand, how our Ancestours, as they were in other things constant and grave, so in leaving and taking up names out of their possessions, they were as vaine and variable as might bee. But even in other parts of England also, this was in old time a thing in usuall practise. Heere lie there round about every way little Townes, which (as throughout this whole County, and Cheshire, and other Northren parts) as they imparted their names to worshipfull houses, so they to have their Lords even unto these daies, men of the very same name with them. As for example, Aston of Aston: Atherton of Atherton, Tillesley of Tillesley, Standish of Standish, Bold of Bold, Hesket of Hesket, Wor∣thington of Worthington, Torbec of Torbec, &c. And an endlesse peece of worke it were to name them one by one, neither is it any part of my purpose to reckon up all fami∣lies of name and worship, but to take a view and survey of the more ancient places. And as vertue and wealth laied the foundations of these and such like Families in these North Countries, and elsewhere (that I may speake it once for all) and provi∣dent moderation with simplicity standing contented with their owne estate, both preserved and encreased them: So, in the South part of England, riotous ex∣pense and superfluity, usurious contracts, voluptuous and vicious life, together with indirect courses and crafty dealings; have in short space utterly overthrowne most flourishing houses, in so much as men complaine, that the offspring of the ancient Gentry hath now a long time faded: But Families as plants have their times of en∣creasing and decreasing, I and overpassing this, will follow on with the course of Mersey, which now by this time runneth downe by Warrington, a Towne knowne by reason of the Lords thereof sirnamed Pincerne. Butlers, who obtained of King Edward the First the liberty of a Mercate for it: Winwicke. From which, Northward, Winwicke is not farre distant: a place among other fat Benefices of England of greatest name: in the upmost part of the Church whereof, are read these rude Verses engraven in an old Character, concerning King Oswald. Hic locus Oswalde quondam placuit tibi valde. Northanhumbrorum fuer as Rex, nunc{que} Polorum Regna tenes, loco passus Marcelde vocato. This place sometime thee pleased well, Oswald, King thou hadst beene once of Northumberland, Thou sufferedst in a place Marcelde call'd, Thy Kingdome now is heaven, that aye doth stand. From Warrington, the River M rsey spreading abroad, and straightwaies drawing in himselfe againe, with a wide and open outlet, very commodious for merchan∣dise entreth into the Irish Sea, where Litherpoole, called in the elder ages , commonly Lirpoole is seated, so named, as it is thought, of the water spreading it selfe in manner of a Poole: whence there is a convenient passage over into Ireland and much frequented, and in that respect more notorious, than for any Antiquity. For, there is no mention extant thereof any where in ancient Writers, but that Ro∣ger of Poictiers, who was Lord, as they spake in those dayes, of the Honour of Lan∣caster, built a Castle heere. Whereof the worthy family of the Molineaux Knights have had the custody now a long time, whose chiefe seat is hard by at Sefion, which, the said Roger of Poictiers gave unto Vivian de Molineaux, shortly after the first en∣try of the Normans. For, all that Territory betweene the two Rivers Ribel and Mer∣sey, the same Roger held: as appeareth evidently by the authenticall Record of Domes∣day booke. Neere unto Seston, Alt a little River seeketh a way into the Sea, and when hee hath found it, giveth name to a small Village Attmouth standing by, and hath Ferneby neere unto it: wherein the moist and mossie soile turffes are digged up, which serve the inhabitants for fewell and candle light. Under the said turfes, there is a certaine dead and blackish water, upon which there swimmeth, I wot not what unctuous matter, and in it swimme little fishes that are caught by the diggers of turfe: Fishes digged out of the ground. So that wee may say, there bee fishes digged heere out of the earth, no lesse than about Heraclea, and Ti s in Pontus. And no mervaile, seeing that in such wa∣tery places fishes otherwhiles seeking for moisture get under the ground, and men goe a fishing with spades. But, that in Paphlagonia many and those good fishes are gotten by digging in places nothing watery, there is some secret and peculiar rea∣son thereof in Nature: and pleasantly wrote Seneca, Why should not fishes enter and passe into the land, if we passe over the Sea? From hence the open shore shooteth out with a great bent; and more within land from the sea standeth Ormeskirke a mercate towne, Ormeskirk. well knowne by reason of the se∣pulture there of the Stanleys, Earles of Derby, whose chiefe seat Latham is hard by: a stately house, which they have enlarged continually, ever since King Henry the Fourth his dayes, what time Sir John Stanley knight, father to John Lord deputy of Ireland, descended of the same stemme whence the Barons de Audley, married the daughter and heire of Sir Thomas Latham, a right noble knight, who brought to him for her dowrie this faire inheritance, Stanleys Earles of Derby. with many other possessions. And from that time have the Stanleys planted their seat heere: of whom Thomas, the sonne of Thomas Lord Stanley, was by King Henry the seventh created Earle of Derby; and had issue by Eleonor Nevill daughter to the Earle of Salisbury, George Lord Strange, for he had wedded Joan the onely daughter and heire of John Baron Le Strange of Knockin, who dying in his fathers life time, begat a sonne named Tho∣mas, the second Earle of Derby; unto whom Anne, the daughter of Edward Lord Hastings, bare Edward the third Earle of Derby, who begat of Dorothea, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, Henry the fourth Earle; who married Mar∣garet, daughter of Henry Clifford Earle of Cumberland, mother unto Ferdinando the fifth Earle lately deceased, and to William now the sixth Earle, who succeeded his brother: but I forget my selfe now, when as I have formerly remembred as much. Duglesse a riveret, Duglesse a rive∣ret. creepeth and stealeth along quietly by this place; neere unto which our noble Arthur, as Ninnius writeth, put the Saxons to flight in a memora∣ble battaile. Wiggin. At the head hereof standeth the towne Wiggin, called in ancient times : of which name I have nothing else to say, but that in Lancashire they call buildings and houses Biggins: Biggin, what it is. neither of the towne, but that it is faire, and a Corpora∣tion also with a Maior and Burgesses: and the parson of the Church, as I have learned, is Lord of the towne. The family of the Hollands. Hard by it Holland sheweth it selfe, out of a younger brother, whereof that most noble and renowned race of the Hollands Earles of Kent, and Dukes also of Surry and Excester, fetched both their originall and their sirname. But the daughter and heire of the eldest brother, who flourished here in knights degree, being in the end married into the house of the Lovels, brought unto them an additi∣on of possessions, The Hollands coat of Armes. with her Armes, viz. in a shield Azure With flowres de Lyz. florete Argent a Lion ram∣pant gardant Arg. Neere unto the mouth of Duglesse is Merton, a very great & large poole, which emptieth it selfe into this river, and then streight waies meeteth with the river Ribell, neare his out-let; for this is the next river after Mersey that run∣neth into the sea, and hath not yet lost quite his former ancient name; for Ptolomee calleth the salt water or arme of the sea here BELLISAMA, Bellisama. and we Ribell, perhaps by addition of the Saxon word Rhe unto it, that signifieth a River. This river comming with a quicke and hasty streame out of the hils in Yorke-shire, taketh his course first Southward, by three exceeding high mountaines, Ingleborow hill at the spring head, which I wondered at to see how it ascendeth as it were by degrees with a huge and mighty ridge Westward, and at the farthest end mounteth up into the aire, as if an o∣ther hill were set upon the head of it: Penigent. Penigent, haply so called of his whitish & snowy top, for so Pengwin signifieth in the british tongue: and he riseth aloft with an huge bulke, howbeit not altogether so high as the other. But when Ribell commeth into Lancashire (for those two stand in Yorke-shire) Pendle-hill advanceth it selfe up to the skie with a lofty head, Pendle hill. and in the very top thereof bringeth forth a peculiar plant, Clowdesbery. which, as though it came out of the clowdes, they tearme Clowdes-bery. But this mountaine is most notorious for the harme that it did not long since to the coun∣try lying beneath it, by reason of a mighty deale of water gushing out of it: as also for an infallible prognostication of raine, so often as the top thereof is covered with a mist. Of these hils I have made mention the more willingly, both because they are the highest in our Apennine: whence commeth this vulgar Rhime. Ingleborow, Pendle, and Penigent, Are the highest hils betweene Scotland and Trent. As also that the reader may understand, as I said before, why the highest Alpes were called of the old Gaules Penninae, Penninae Alpes. and why the very top of the hils, named Pen∣num, and Apennini, Pen in British what it is. Clithero. Whaley. were of them so tearmed. For Pen in the British tongue signifi∣eth the tops of hils. By an out corner or parcel of Pendle hill, standeth Clithero castle, built by the Lacies neere unto Ribell, and a neighbour unto it Whaley, in the Saxon tongue Walalez, famous for the monastery that the said Lacies founded, which was translated from Stanlaw in Cheshire hither, in the yeere 1296. where in the yeere 798. duke Wade unfortunately gave battaile to Ardulph King of Northumberland, at Billangho, which is more short called Langho. This Ribell no sooner turneth into the West, Riblechester. but imparteth his name to a small towne, which in our age is called Ribleche∣ster: where are digged up from time to time so many monuments of Romane anti∣quity, statues, peeces of coyn, Pillars, Piedestals & Chapters of pillars, heathen altars, Marble-stones and inscriptions, that the inhabitants may seeme not without cause to have this hobling rhyme so rise in their mouthes. It is written upon a wall in Rome, Ribchester was as rich as any towne in Christendome. And the port high wayes came directly hither, rai ed up with eminent cause is: one from Yorke, another out of the North, through Bowland-Forrest, a spacious peece of ground, which as yet is most evidently to be seene for many miles together. But the country folke have so disfigured the inscriptions, that although I did see many, yet could I scarce read one or two of them. At Salesbury hall, an house of that ancient family of the Talbots, standing neere by, I saw the base or foot of a pillar with this inscription. DEO MARTI, ET VICTORIAE DD. AUGG. ET. CC—NN In a wall neare unto it, there is another great stone infixed, shewing in the fore-part Cupid and another little image; out of the backe-side or reverse whereof this was ex∣emplified for me: but the inscription carrieth no sense with it, which because it trou∣bled me a long time, I will set down here underneath, to see what the opinion of other men is of it. SEOESAM ROLNASON OSALVEDN AL. Q. Q. SAR. BREVENM BEDIANIS ANTONI US MEG. VI. IC. DOMU ELITER. For mine owne part, I can make nothing else thereof, but that most of these words were the British names of places adjoining. In the yeere 1603. when I went a second time to see this place, I hapned upon the greatest and fairest Altar that ever I saw, de∣dicated to the Mother Goddesses by a Captain of the Asturians, with this inscription. DEISMATRIBVS M. In the house of Thomas Rhodes. INGENVI∣VS ASIATICVS Haply, Decú∣rio Alae Astu∣rum, susceptum solvit ( . vo∣tum) libens, lu¦bens, meritò. DEC. AL. AST. SS. LL. M. Concerning these DEABUS, Deae Matres. Mother God∣desses. See in the Bi∣shopricke of Durham. Plutarch in M. Marcellus. or DEIS MATRIBUS, that is, Mothers Goddesses, what they were I cannot finde out with all my searching: for in the volumes of In∣scriptions gathered through the world, save in another Altar besides found among us, they are not mentioned, as farre as I remember. Onely I read that Enguium, a little towne in Sicily, was ennobled for the presence of the MOTHER GODDESSES, wherein were shewed certaine speares and brazen helmets, which Metio and Ulysses consecrated to those Goddesses. Another little Altar I saw there, cast out among rubbish stone, with this inscription. PACIFE RO MARTI ELEGAUR BA POS UIT EX VO TO. So small a one this was, that it may seeme to have beene some poore mans little altar to carry with him to and fro, serving only to burne and offer incense or salt, and meale upon it: whereas that other was farre bigger, and made for to sacrifice and of∣fer greater beasts upon it. Altars of the Gentiles. Genes. 8. In these altars the posterity no doubt imitated Noah, even after they had fallen away and revolted from the true worship of God. Nei∣ther erected they altars to their Gods onely, but also unto their Emperours by way of servile flattery, with this impious title, NUMINI MAIESTATIQUE EORUM, that is, unto their GOD-HEAD and Majesty. Unto these they kneeled in humble maner, these they clasped about and embraced as they prayed, before these they tooke their oathes: and in one word, in these and in their sacrifices consisted the maine substance of all their religion, so farre forth, that whosoever had no altar of their owne, they were thought verily to have no religion, nor to acknowledge any God at all. Moreover, very lately, and but the other day, a stone was digged up here, where∣in was engraven the naked portract or image of a man on horse-backe, without saddle, without bridle, with both hands seeming to launce his speare, and ready to ride over a naked man lying downe along at his foot, who holdeth be∣fore I wot not what foure square peece. Betweene the horse and him that lieth along are these letters D.M. and under him so lying, are read these words CAL. SARMATA. Haply C. Al. for Centurio Alae Sarmata∣rum. All the letters beside, which were many, are so worne out and gone, that they could not be read, neither list I to guesse any farther what they were. That ALA SARMATARUM, that is, a wing of Sarmatian horsemen abode in this place, it may seeme, as well by that former inscription, as by this, that many yeeres before was found hard by. HIS. TERRIS. TEGITUR. AEL. MATRONA QU— Out of Willi∣am Lambards notes. VIX. AN. XXVIII. M. II. D. VIII. ET. M. JULIUS MAXIMUS. FIL. VIX. AN. VI. M. III. D. XX. ET CAM PANIA. DUBBA. MATER VIX. AN. L. JULIUS. MAXIMUS —ALAE. SAR. CONJUX CONJUGI. INCOMPARABILI ET. FILIO. PATRI. PIENTIS SIMO. ET SOCERAE. TENA CISSIMAE MEMORIAE. P. But hence have wee no light at all toward the finding out of the ancient name of this place which now is in question, unlesse it hath now and then changed the name, which otherwhiles usually happeneth. For in this place Ptolomy hath set RIGODU∣NUM: if for RIBODUNUM, Ribodunum. the name is not altogether unlike to Ribbechester: and just at this distance from Mancunium, Coccium. that is, Manchester, that is to say 18. miles off, doth Antonine place COCCIM, which also in some copies we read GOCCIUM. But when the flourishing fortune of this City, having runne the full and fatall pe∣riod, was faded, either by warre, or earthquake, as the common sort doe think, some∣what lower where Ribell suffereth the violence of the flowing tides of the Sea, and is called of the Geographer BELLISAMA AESTUARIUM, that is, the salt-water BELLI∣SAMA, neare unto Peneworth, Penworth, o∣therwise called Penverdant. Preston. where in the Conquerors reigne there was a little castle (as appeareth by the Records of the said King) out of the fall of Riblechester arose in steed of it her daughter Preston, a great, and (for these Countries) a faire town, & well inhabited, so called of religious men; for in our speech the name soundeth as much as Priests towne. Beneath this Ribell, Derwen a rill commeth in with his water: and the first mercate towne that hee watereth is Blacke-borne, so called of the Blacke-water, which towne belonging in times past to the Lacies, gave name unto Blackburne-shire, a little territory adjoining; Houghton. from thence it runneth by Houghton-towre, which com∣municated the name unto a notable family that long time dwelt in it: and by Wale∣ton, which William, Walton. Lord of Lancaster, King Stephens sonne, gave unto Walter de Walton: and afterward it was the possession of the ancient race of the Langtons, who descended from the said Waltons. But now let us returne. The said Preston whereof I spake, is by the common people called Preston in An∣dernesse, for Acmundes-nesse, Ander-nesse. for so the English Saxons tearmed this part of the shire, which lying between the two rivers, Ribel and Cocar, stretcheth out with a promon∣tory in manner of a nose, which afterwards they also called Acmundernesse. Wherein were no more but 16. villages inhabited in King William the Conquerors time; the rest lay wast, as we read in Doomes-day booke, and Roger of Poictiers held the same. But afterwards it belonged to Theobald Walter : from whom the Bottelers of Ire∣land derive their beginning: for thus wee read in a Charter of K. Richard the first, Know yee, that wee have given, and by this present Charter confirmed unto Theobald Walter, for his homage and service, Agmondernesse full and whole, with all the apperte∣nences, &c. This part yeeldeth plenty of oates, but not so apt to beare barly. How∣beit it is full of fresh pastures, especially to the sea side, where it is partly Champion ground, The file. and thereupon it seemeth that a good part of it is called The File, for the Field (and yet in the Kings Rolls it goeth under the Latine name LIMA, that is, a File, namely, that Smithes toole or instrument wherewith Iron, or any other thing is smoothed.) But because elsewhere it is marish ground, they hold it not very wholsome. Wie, a little river speedily cutting over this part, commeth rolling downe out of Wierdale, Grenhaugh c stle. a very solitary place, and runneth by Grenhaugh Castle, which Tho∣mas Stanley, the first Earle of Derby out of this family, built: what time as hee stood in feare of certaine out-lawed Gentlemen of this shire, whose possessions King Henry the seventh had freely given unto him. For many an assault they gave him, and other whiles in hostile manner made inrodes into his lands, untill the moderate carriage of the good and worthy man, and processe of time pacified these quarrels. Here along the sea shore, A new mann of making . you may see in many places heaps of sand, whereup∣on they powre water, untill it gather a saltish humour, which afterwards with turfes they boile untill it be white salt. There be also here uncertaine sands not to bee tru∣sted, but ready to catch and swallow (they call them Quick-sands ) so dangerous for travellers, whiles at a low water, when tide is past, they seeke to goe the nearest way, that they had need to take very good heed lest in going a foot (I use Sidonius his words) they suffer not shipwracke, and be cast away on the land. But especially a∣bout the mouth of Cocar, Quick-sands. where, as it were, in a field of Syrts or Quick-sands, Cokar sand Abbey, an Abbey not long since of the Cluniack Monkes, built by Ranulph de Meschines, but open to the violence of windes, stood betweene the mouths of Co∣car and Lune or Lone, The river Lu or Lone. Salmons. and hath a bleake prospect into the wide Irish sea. This river Lone, commonly called Lune, springing out of the mountaines of Westmorland, running Southward in a chanell now broad, now narrow, with many a reach in and out hindring his streame, enricheth the dwellers thereby in Summer time with great store of Salmons: which because they delight in cleere water, and especially in shal∣low places that are sandy, come up thicke together into this, and other rivers of this coast. As soone as Lune is entred into Lancashire, Lace, a little brooke from out of the East, Over-burrow joyneth his streame with it. In which place now standeth Over-Burrow, a very small village of husbandmen; which, as the inhabitants enformed mee, had beene sometimes a great City, and tooke up all those large fields betweene Lacce and Lone, and after it had suffered all miseries that follow famine, was driven to composition through extremity. This tradition they received from their ance∣stours, delivered as it were from hand to hand unto them. And in very truth by di∣vers and sundry monuments exceeding ancient, by engraven stones, pavements of square checker worke, peeces of Romane coine, and by this new name Burrow, which with us signifieth a Burgh, that place should seeme to bee of great antiqui∣ty. But if it recover the ancient name, it may thanke other and not mee, although I have sought as narrowly, and diligently for it, as for Ants pathes: neither is any man to thinke, that the severall names of every towne in Britaine are precisely noted and set done in Ptolomee, Antonine, The Notice of Provinces, and other approved and principall Authors. But if a man may goe by ghesse, I would willingly thinke that it was BREMETONACUM (which Ierome Surita, a Spaniard, in his notes upon Anto∣nine, Bremetona∣cum. or Rible-chester deemeth truely to be a different place from BREMENTURACUM) and that by the distance from COCCIUM, or Rible-chester. From this Burrow the river Lune runneth beside Thurland Tunstalls, a fortresse built by Sir Thomas Tunstall in the time of King Henry the fourth, when the King had given him Licence to fortifie and kernell his mansion house ; Kernellare what it is. Hornby castl Barons Mon Eagle. that is, to embatle it: also by Hornby a faire castle, which glorieth much of the first founder, N. de Mont Begon, and of the Lords thereof, The Harringtons and Stanleys, Barons Stanleyes of Mont-Eagle, descended from Thomas Stanley, the first Earle of Derby of that house, and advanced to that title by King Henry the eighth, of whom the third and the last named William, left behind him his onely daughter and heire, Elizabeth, wife to Edward Parker Baron Morley, mother to Sir William Parker, whom in that regard King James commanded to be summoned to Parliament by the title of Lord Mont-Eagle, and whom wee and all our posterity may acknowledge to have beene borne for the good of all Britain. For, by a short letter, obscurely penned, and secretly sent unto him, and by him dutifully discovered, in a happy houre was detected, at the ve∣ry last houre, in a maner, when the whole State was at the point to perish by the most horrible and detestable treason, that ever any barbarous impiety could contrive: what time certaine godlesse and irreligious monsters of men, The Gunpow∣der treason. masking under the man∣tle of religion, having bestowed a great quantity of gun-powder under the Parlia∣ment house, stood ready with match in hand to give fire thereto, for to blow up both Prince and Countrey with one blast in a moment. Lone having passed on some few miles from hence, commeth within the sight of Lancaster, Lancaster. standing on his South banke, the chiefe towne of this region: which the inhabitants more truly call Loncaster, as the Scots also, who name it Loncastell, of the River Lone. Both the name still remaining, and the river running under it, doe ar∣gue in some sort that it is LONGOVICUM, where, under the Lievtenant Generall of Britaine, as wee finde in the Notice of Provinces, a company of the Longovicari∣ans, who of the place borrowed that name, kept their station. Although the towne at this day is not very well peopled, nor much frequented, and all the inhabitants thereof are given to husbandry (for the territory all round about is well manured, ly∣ing open, fresh and faire, and not voide of woods:) yet for proofe of Romane anti∣quity, they finde otherwhiles peeces of the Emperours coine, especially where the Friery stood: for there, they say, was the plot upon which the ancient City was planted, which the Scots, after they had with a sudden out-road wasted all in their way, in the yeere of our Redemption 1322. set on fire and burnt. Since which time they have begunne to build nearer unto a greene hill by the river side, on which standeth the castle, great I cannot say, nor of any antiquity, but faire and strong. And hard by it standeth upon the height of the hill, the onely Church they have, where the Monkes aliens had in times past a cell founded by Roger of Poictiers. A little beneath which, by a faire bridge over Lone, in the descent and side of the hill where it is steepest, hangeth a peece of a most ancient wall of Ro∣mane work, seeming ready to reele; Wery wall they call it, after a later British name, as it should seeme, of this towne. For they called it Caer Werid, as one would say, The Greene City, happely of that fresh greene hill. But I leave this to others. John Lord of Moriton and of Lancaster, afterwards King of England, confirmed by Charter to his Burgesses of Lancaster, all the liberties which he had granted unto the Burgesses of Bristoll. And King Edward the third in the sixe and thirtieth yeere of his reign, gran∣ted unto the Mayor and Bailives, and Commonalty of the towne of Lancaster, that Plees and Sessions should not elsewhere bee holden. This towne seeth the Pole Arcticke (that I may note so much) elevated foure and fifty degrees and five minutes, and standeth removed from the utmost line of the West, twenty degrees and forty eight minutes in Longitude. Whiles I looked round about from the top of the said castle hill, to see the mouth of Lone, Fournesse. that issueth it selfe into the sea a little lower, Fornesse the other part of this shire appeared in sight, which the sea hath after a sort violently rent apart from the rest. For when as the shore did from hence shoote out a maine way into the West, the Ocean, as it were much displeased and angry hereat, obstinately ceased not to flash and mangle it, nay, which is more, hath with his fell flowing at boisterous tides devoured the shore: and thereby maketh three wide cre kes or bayes; namely, Kent-sand, at which the river Ken powreth it selfe forth; Leven-sand, and Dudden-sand : betweene which (two) the land beareth out so much, that thereupon it tooke the name. For with us in our language, For-nesse & Foreland is all one with the Latine Promontorium anterius (that is, a Fore-promontory. ) All this part, unlesse it be hard by the sea side, mounteth up aloft with high topped hils, and huge fels stan∣ding thicke together (which they tearme Forness-fells. Among which the Britans li∣ved safe a great while, trusting upon these strong naturall fenses: although the victo∣rious English Saxons made way through all in the end. For in the yeere 228. after there comming in, I gather that the Britans had their abode here, because Egfride King of Northumberland, Carthmell. gave unto Holy Saint Cuthbert, the land called Carthmell, and all the Britans in it (thus we finde written in his life) and it is very well knowne that Carthmell is a part of this shire by Kentsand, and a little towne in it retaineth yet the same name: Wherein William Mareschall the elder, Earle of Pembroch built a Priory, and endowed it with living. If you read in Ptolomee SETANTIORUM , that is, The Setantians Mere, as some Copies have; and not Setantiorum , that is, The Setantians Haven, I durst boldly avouch that these Britans here were cal∣led SETANTII. For among these mountaines the greatest standing water in all Eng∣land, now called Winander-mere ; Winander∣mere. in the English Saxon (haply of his winding and turning in and out) lieth stretched out for the space of ten miles or thereabout with crooked bankes, and is all paved (as it were) with stone in the bot∣tome: in some places of wonderfull depth, and breeding a peculiar kinde of fish found no where else, The fish Chare. which the inhabitants there by call A Chare. And a little vil∣lage standing hard by carrieth the name thereof: In which Eathred King of Nor∣thumberland, in the yeer of Christ 792. when he had by force fetched King Elfwolds sonnes out of Yorke, flue them, that by his owne wickednesse, and their blood, hee might secure the Kingdome to himselfe and his. Betwixt this Mere and the river Dudden, the promontory runneth out, which wee commonly call Fornesse, and hath the Iland Walney, as a fore-fence or countre∣mure lying along by it, with a small arme of the sea betweene: The gullet or entry into which is defended with a fort, called the Pile of Fouldrey, standing in the midst of the waves upon a rocke, erected there by the Abbot of Fornesse, in the first yeere of King Edward the third. As for the Promontory it selfe, The booke of Fournesse. there is nothing worth the sight in it, unlesse it be the ruines of a monastery of Cistertian Monkes, called Fornesse Abbey, which Ste∣phen Earle of Bullen, afterwards King of England, in the yeere of our redemption 1127. built in a place called sometimes Bekensgill, or translated rather from Tulket in Andernesse. Out of the Monkes whereof, and from no place else (as they themselves have reported) the Bishops of the Isle of Man (that lieth just over against) were by an ancient custome wont to bee elected: as having beene the mother (as it were) of many Monasteries in the said Man, Aldingham. Harringtons. and in Ireland. More Eastward standeth Alding∣ham, an ancient hereditament belonging to the family of the Haveringtons, or Har∣ringtons, unto whom it came from the Flemmings, by the Cancefelds ; and whose in∣heritance descended by a daughter unto William Bonvill of Somersetshire, and at last by him unto the Greies, Marquesses of Dorset. And somwhat higher is Ulverston, in this regard not to bee passed over in silence, for that King Edward the third gave a moity thereof unto Sir John Coupland, a most brave warriour: whom also he advan∣ced to the dignity of a Banaret, because in the battaile at Durham, he took David the second King of the Scots prisoner. But after his decease, the same King granted it with other faire lands in this tract, and the title also of Earle of Bedford, unto Ingel∣ram Lord Coucy of France, as who had married his daughter Isabel, and whose ance∣stours in right of Christiana Lindsey, had great revenewes in England. Touching the noble men which have borne the title of Lancaster, Lords of La caster. there were in the first infancy of the Norman Empire three stiled Lords of the Honour of Lancaster : namely, Roger of Pictavensis, or of Poictiers Poictou, the sonne of Roger Mont-gomery, who was surnamed Pictavensis, as William of Malmesbury writeth, because hee had married a wife from out of Poictou in France. But when he had by his perfidious disloyalty lost this honour, William the sonne of King Stephen, and Earle of Moriton and Warren, had the same given unto him by his Father. After whose death King Richard the first bestowed it upon his brother John, who was afterward King of England. For thus we read in an old History: King Richard declared his singular love to his brother Iohn. For beside Ireland, Walter He∣mingford. Ro. Hoveden pag. 373. b. and the Earledome of Moriton in Normandy, he heaped upon him so many dignities in England, that he was in maner a Tetrarch there: Finally, he conferred upon him Cornwall, Lancaster, Notingham, Derby, with the country adjoining, and ma∣ny more beside. A good while after King Henry the third, the sonne of John, first advanced Edmund his second sonne, called by some Crouth-backe, to the title of Earle of Lancaster, unto whom hee conveyed and made over the inheritances and honours of Simon Montfort Earle of Leicester, Robert Ferrars Earle of Derby, and John of Monmouth, because they had risen, and rebelliously born armes against him: and he gave this Honor of Lancaster unto him in these words, The Honour, County, Castle and Town of Lancaster, with the Cow-pastures, & forrests of Wiresdale, & Lowns∣dale, New castle under Lime, the manour, forrest, and Castle of Pickering, the manor of Scaleby, the towne of Gomicester, and the rents of the towne of Huntendon, &c. After hee the said Edmund had missed the kingdome of Sicily, in which the Pope had in∣vested him in vaine by a ring, and not without ridiculous disgrace to the English na∣tion, caused in honour of him certaine peeces of gold to bee stamped, with this title, AIMUNDUS REX SICILIAE, Earle of Lan∣caster, King of Sicily. having first cunningly suckt a great masse of money from the credulous King in this regard. This Edmund (when his first wife Avelina, daughter and heire to William de Fortibus Earle of Albemarle, was dead issuelesse, who neverthelesse in her Will had made him her heire) married Blanch of Artois, of the roiall family of France, to his second wife, and by her had Thomas, Henry, and John, that died an infant. Thomas was the second Earle of Lancaster, who tooke to wife Alice, the onely daughter and heire of Henry Lacy Earle of Lincolne: who by her deed passed over unto the house of Lancaster her owne inheritance, and her mothers, that which belonged to the family of Long Espee, who were Earles of Sa∣lisbury, like as her father the said Henry Lacy had made the like conveiance before of his owne lands, in case Alice should dye without issue, as it afterward happened. But this Thomas, for behaving himselfe insolently toward his soveraigne Edward the se∣cond, and still supplying fewell to civill warres, being taken prisoner in the field, lost his head, leaving no issue. Howbeit, when this sentence of death pronounced a∣gainst him, was afterwards by authority of Parliament reversed, because hee had not his tryall by his Peeres, according to the Law, and great Charter, his brother Henry succeeded after him in all his possessions and honours. Hee also was advanced in e∣state by his wife Maude, daughter and sole heire of Sir Patricke De Cadurcis. Chaworth, who brought unto him not onely her owne patrimony, but also great inheritances in Wales, of Mauric of London, and of Siward, from whom she descended. This Henry left behind him Henry his onely sonne, whom King Edward the third from an Earle raised unto the honour of a Duke: Dukes of Lan∣caster. and he was second man of all our Nobility which received the name of Duke. But hee, having no issue male, departed this life, leaving behind him two daughters, Maude and Blanch, betweene whom the in∣heritance was divided. Maud was married to William of Bavaria, who was Earle of Holland, Zeland, Frisland, Henault, and in his wives right, of Leicester. And when as she deceased without children, John of Gaunt, so called because hee was borne at Gaunt in Flanders, fourth sonne of King Edward the third, who had married Blanch, the other daughter of Henry aforesaid, entred upon the whole inheri∣tance: and now being for wealth equivalent to many Kings, and created withall by his father Duke of Lancaster, he obtained also at his hands great roialties; for hee, having related what noble service he had performed to his countrey, at home and a∣broad in the warres, preferred the County of Lancaster to the dignity of a County Palatine, by his letters Patent, the tenour whereof runneth in this wise. Wee have granted for us and our heires, unto our foresaid sonne, that he may have for tearme of his life, his Chancery within the County of Lancaster, and his writs to be sealed under his own seale to be appointed for the office of the Chancellour: also Iustices of his owne, as well to hold Plees of the Crowne, as also other plees whatsoever touching common Law: also the hearing and deciding of the same, yea and the making of all executions whatsoever, by vertue of their owne writs and officers there. Moreover, all other liberties and Roialties whatsoever to a County Palatine belonging, as freely and in as ample maner, as the Earle of Chester within the same County of Chester is known to have &c. Neither was he Duke of Lancaster onely, but also by his mar∣riage with Constance the daughter of Peter King of Leon and Castile, John of Gau King of Ca∣stile. hee for a time was stiled by the name of King of Leon and of Castile. But by a composition he gave this over; and in the thirteenth yeere of King Richard the Second, by consent of Parliament was created Duke of Aquitaine, to have and hold the same for tearme of life of the King of England, as King of France: but to the universall dislike of A∣quitaine, repining, and affirming that their Seigniory was inseparably annexed to the Crowne of England. At which time his stile ranne thus, Iohn, sonne to the King of England, Duke of Aquitaine and of Lancaster, Earle of Derby, Lincolne, and Leicester, and high Steward of England. After him, King Henry the fourth. Henry of Bollinbroke his sonne succeeded in the Dukedome of Lan∣caster, who when hee had dispossessed Richard the second, and obtained the King∣dom of England; he considering that being now King he could not beare the title of Duke of Lancaster, and unwilling that the said title should be discontinued, ordained by assent of Parliament, that Henry his eldest sonne should enjoy the same, and be stiled, Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitain, Lancaster, and Cornwall, and Earle of Chester : and also that the liberties and franchises of the Dutchy of Lancaster, should remaine to his said sonne severed from the Crowne of England: and to make better assurance to himselfe, his heires and successours in these inheritances, by authority of Parlia∣ment he ordained in these words. Parliament Roll 1. H. 4. We, not willing that our said inheritance, or the liber∣ties of the same, by occasion of this present assumption upon us of our regall state & digni∣ty, should be in any thing changed, transferred, diminished, or impaired, will that the same our inheritance, with the foresaid rights and liberties thereof, be kept, continued, and held fully and wholly, to us & our said heires in the said Charters specified, in the same maner and forme, condition and state, as they descended and came unto us: and also with all and every such liberties and franchises, and other priviledges, commodities, and profits what∣soever, in which our Lord and father whiles he lived had and held it for terme of his own life, by the grant of Richard late King. And by the tenour of these presents, of our own cer∣taine knowledge, with the consent of this our present Parliament, we grant, declare, de∣cree, and ordaine for us and our heires, that as well our Dutchy of Lancaster, as all other things and every one, Counties, Honours, Castles, Manours, Fees, or Inheritances, Advo∣cations, Possessions, Annuities, and Seignories whatsoever, descended unto us before the obtaining of our Regall dignity, howsoever & wheresoever, by right of inheritance in ser∣vice, or in reversion, or any way whatsoever, remaine for ever to us and our said heires, specified in the Charters abovesaid, in forme aforesaid. After this, K. Henry the fifth by authority of Parliament dissevered from the crown and annexed unto this Dutchy a very great and large inheritance, which had descen∣ded unto him in right of his mother Dame Mary, who was daughter and one of the heires of Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford. In this forme and estate it remained un∣der Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth: but King Edward the fourth in the first yeere of his reigne, when hee had in Parliament attainted and forfeited Henry the sixth, appropriated it, as they use to speake, unto the Crowne, that is to say, un∣to himselfe, and his heires Kings of England: From which King Henry the seventh notwithstanding forthwith separated. And so it continueth, having severall officers, namely, A Chancellor, an Attourney, a Receiver, a Clerke of the Court, sixe Assistants, a Messenger, two Auditors, 23. Receivers, and three Supervisors, &c. There are counted in this shire, beside very many Chappels, Parishes 36. and no more: but those wonderfull populous, and which for multitude of inhabitants, farre exceed the greatest parishes elsewhere. WESTMORLANDIAE Comitatus qui olim Spectaint ad BRIGANTAS WEST-MOR-LAND. B EYOND the furthest part of Lancashire more Northward, lieth another lesser countrey of the Brigantes, called by late Latine writers Westmaria, and Westmorlandia, in our tongue West-more-land, and of some later Latine writers Westmoria: bounded on the West and North side with Cumberland, on the East with Yorke-shire, and the Bishopricke of Dur∣ham. Which because it lyeth all of it among moores and high hilles reaching one to another (for our Apennine waxeth here broader and broader still as it runneth) and was for the most part un-manured, came by this name in our language. For such barren places, which cannot easily by the painfull labour of the husbandman bee brought to fruitfulnesse, the Northren Englishmen call Moores : and West-more-land is nothing else with us, but A westerne moorish country. Let that dreame therefore as touching King Marius, bee excluded out of the schoole of reverend antiquity, who forsooth, as our Chroniclers have dreamed, subdued the Picts, and called this countrey after his owne name. The more Southerly part of this shire, contained in a narrow roome betweene the river Lone and Winander mere, is reputed fruitfull enough in the vallies, although it can shew many felles, The Barony of Kendale. with rough and stony rockes, lying ever bare without grasse: and is all tearmed by one name, The Barony of Kendale and Candale, that is, The Dale by Can : for it took name of the river Can, which running rough upon stones, cutteth through it. On the west banke whereof standeth Kandale or Kendale, called also Kirke by Kandale, a towne of very great trade and resort, with two broad and long streets crossing the one over the other; and a place for excellent clothing, and for in∣dustry so surpassing, that in regard thereof it carrieth a great name: For the inha∣bitants have great trafficke and vent of their woollen clothes throughout all parts of England. Lords of Ken¦dale. History of Fournesse. They count it also much for their credit, that it hath dignified Barons and Earles with the title thereof. As for their Barons, they were the offspring of Iuo Taleboys: of whose race, William, by consent of King Henry the second, called himselfe William of Lancaster, The family o Lancaster. whose Niece and heire was wedded unto Gilbert, the sonne of Roger Fitz-Reinfrid, by whose daughters (after her sonne William was dead) the inheritance went to Peter Brus, Lord of Skelton, the second of that fore∣name, and unto William Lindesay ; L.Par of Ken¦dale. from whom by the mothers side, as we learne out of the Lieger book of Fornesse Abbey, Ingelram Lord of Coucy in France, fetched his descent. By which Peter Brus his daughter, the sister and heire of Peter Brus the third, came this Barony to the Rosses of Werke, and from them by right of inheritance this possession was devolved upon the Parres, of whom Sir William Par was made Lord Par by King Henry the eighth. As for the Castle, the ancient seat of these Lords, standing over against the towne, it runneth to decay through age and neglect. As for Earles of Kendale, Earles of Ke ¦dale. there have beene three in number: John Duke of Bedford, advanced to that honour by his brother King Henry the fifth: John Duke of Somer∣set: and John de Foix, of that most noble and honorable family of the Foix in France, whom King Henry the sixth, for his faithfull service in the French warres, had pre∣ferred to that dignity. Whence perhaps it is, that some of this house of Foix in France, retain the name still of Candale. As for any glory else of antiquity, Kendall to my knowledge challengeth none. And yet I was once of opinion, that it was CON∣CANGII, a station place sometimes of the Romanes; but time hath now instructed mee better. Catadupe or Forses. Somewhat beneath, in the river Can, are two Catadupae, or water falls, where the waters have a downefall with a mighty noise: the one is by Levens, a little village; the other more Southward, neere to Betham ; which to the neighbour inhabitants are as good as true prognostications: for when that which standeth North from them soundeth more cleere and aloud in their eares, they looke certainely for faire weather: when that on the South side doth the same, they expect no other than showers of raine, and foggy mists. Thus much for the South and narrower part of this region, which Westward is bounded with the river Winster, and the spa∣tious Lake Winander-mere, whereof I spake erewhile, and Eastward with the river Lone or Lune. At the upper corner of Winander-mere lieth the dead carcasse, as one would say, of an ancient City, with great ruines of walls, and many heapes of rubbish one from another, remaining of buildings without the walls yet to bee seene. The fortresse thereof was somewhat long, fensed with a ditch and rampire; for it tooke up in length 132. Ells, and in bredth 80. That it had beene the Romans worke is evident, by the British brickes, by the mortar tempered with little peeces of bricke among, by small earthen pots or pitchers, by small cruets or vials of glasse, by peeces of Roman money oftentimes there found, and by round stones as much as milstones or quernstones, of which layed and couched together they framed in old time their co∣lumnes, and by the paved high waies leading unto it. Now the ancient name thereof is gone, Ambleside. Amboglana. unlesse a man would ghesse at it, and thinke it were that AMBO∣GLANA, whereof the booke of Notices maketh mention, seeing at this day it is cal∣led Ambleside. On the East side the river Lone serveth for a limit, and after his name the tract ly∣ing about it is called Lonsdale: the principall towne whereof is Kirkby Lonsdale, whither all the people round about repaire to Church and mercate. Above the Spring-head of Lone, the countrey spreadeth broader, and the hills shoot out with many turnings, betweene which there lye some vallies marvellous steepe and deepe withall, with many hollow places in manner of caves. Among these hills that no∣table river Eden, which Ptolomee calleth ITUNA, shewing his head first in Yorkshire, carrying a small and faint streame in the beginning, but afterwards growing by lit∣tle and little bigger, with sundry beckes still augmenting it, seeketh a way North∣west, by Pendragon Castle, which hath nothing left unto it unconsumed by time, be∣sides the bare name, Baron What∣ton. and an heape of stones: From thence hee passeth by Wharton Hall, the seat of the Barons Wharton ; of whom the first was Sir Thomas Wharton, ad∣vanced to that dignity by King Henry the Eighth, whom succeeded his sonne of the same name; and after him Philip that now liveth, the third Baron, a right honoura∣ble person. Afterwards it runneth downe by Kirkby Stephen, a mercate towne well knowne, and both the Musgraves, two little villages, which gave name unto that martiall and warlike family of the Musgraves : out of which in the reigne of King Edward the third, Thomas Musgrave flourished, and was by solemne writ of sum∣mons called to the Parliament in the ranke of Barons: and these Musgraves had their principall habitation in Heartly castle adjoining. Heartly castle. Heere Eden doth, as it were, make stay with his streame, to give meeting unto o∣ther petty rivers: upon one of which, scarce two miles off from Eden it selfe, stood VERTERAE, a towne of ancient memory, mentioned by Antonine the Emperour, and the booke of Notices: wherein it is notified, that in the declining age of the Romane Empire, a Romane Captaine made his abode there, with a band of the Di∣rectores. But now the towne is decayed, and become a small poore village fensed with a little Fortresse, and the name turned into Burgh, for it is commonly named Burgus sub∣s xeto. Burgh under Stanmore. Burgus. Vegetius lib. 4. cap. 10. Burgh under Stanemore. For in the time of the later Emperours (and willing I am to note so much once for all) little castles, meet for warre occasions, and furnished with store of corne, began to bee tearmed Burgi, that is, Burghs, by a new name: which after that the Empire was translated into the East, the Germans and others may seeme to have borrowed of the Greek word . Hence also came the name of Burgundians, because they inhabited Burghs ; for so in that age they used to call those dwelling places which were planted heere and there, along limits and mar∣ches. Neither have I read any thing else of that Burgh, but that in the beginning of the Norman government, the Northren English conspired heere against William the Conquerour. That this Burgh was VERTERAE, I dare be bold to affirme, be∣cause the distance thereof from Levatrae of the one side, and from Brovonacum on the other, being reduced into Italian miles, doth exactly agree with Antonines num∣bers: and for that the high street of the Romans, as yet evidently apparent by the ridges thereof, leadeth this way to BROVONACUM by ABALLABA, whereof men∣tion is made in the booke of Notices, which hath hitherto kept the ancient name so well, that it doth most evidently descrie and shew it selfe, yea in some sort remove all doubt. Aballaba. Apelby. For we call it short in steed of ABALLABA Apelby. Memorable is it, for the antiquity and situation only. In the Romans time, no doubt, the Aurelian Mau∣res kept a station there. It standeth also in a pleasant site, encompassed for the most part with the river Eden : but so slenderly inhabited, and the building so simple, that were it not that by reason of the antiquity it had deserved to be counted the chiefe towne of the shire, and to have Sessions and Assises kept in the castle, which is the comon gaole for malefactors, it would be little better than a village. For all the beautie of it is in one broad street, which from North to South riseth with an easie ascent of the hill: in the upper part whereof standeth the castle aloft, environed whol∣ly almost with the river. In the nether end of it is the Church, and thereby a school, which Robert Langton and Miles Spenser, Doctors of the law founded; the Master whereof is Reginald Bainbrige, a right learned man, who governeth the same with great commendation; and who of his courtesie hath exemplified for mee many an∣tique inscriptions, and brought some hither into his garden. Neither verily was it for nought, that William of Newborrough calleth this town and Burgh Princely holds, where he writeth that William King of Scots, surprised them on the suddain, a lit∣tle before himselfe was taken prisoner at Alnewick. Which King John afterwards having recovered, gave liberally unto Robert Vipont, in consideration of his singular good service to him and the state. From hence the river with his full course passeth directly North-west by Buley, a castle of the Bishops of Carlile; and by Kirby Thore, under which are seene great ruines of an old towne, and pieces of Roman coin other∣whiles digged up; and not long since this inscription. DEO BELATV CAD∣RO LIB VOTV M. FECIT. IOLVS. But tract of time hath quite out-worne the old name, and it is called at this day Whealop-Castle. Whellep ca∣stle. Gallatum. If I might without prejudice to the Judges of antiquitie, I would say it were GALLAGUM mentioned by Ptolomee, which Antonine nameth GALLATUM, the distance of journies accord so well, and the name doth not altogether gainsay. For what words the Britans began with GALL, the English turned into Wall. Thus they called GALENA Wallingford, and Gall Sever Wall of Sever, Gall dour Wall-broke, &c. Doubtlesse it was a place in old time of better note, seeing that from hence there leadeth a paved street ( Maiden way they call it) to Caer Vorran neare the Picts wall, Maiden way. 20. miles or thereabouts in length, by fells, wastes, and moores. Along which street I would willingly think, were placed those Stations and Mansions mentioned by Anto∣nine in the ninth journey of Britain; although no man is able precisely to say in what places they stood: and no marvaile, considering that time, which devoureth and con∣sumeth all things, hath continually fed upon their carcases so many ages together. Not far from Whellop, hard by Crawdundale, there are evident remaines of ditches, trenches, and mounts cast up: and among them this Roman inscription (the draught whereof Reginald Bainbrig before named, head schoolemaster of Applebey, took out for me) was ingraven in a craggie rocke, the forepart of which was quite eaten out with continuance of time, or thrust out by the root of a tree there growing. —VARRONIVS —ECTVS LEG. XX. V. V. —AEL. LVCANVS —P. LEG. II. AVG. C. That is to say, by my reading— Varronius Praefectus legionis vicesimae valentis victricis—Aelius Lucanus Praefectus legionis secundae Augustae, castrametati sunt— Varronius captaine of the xx. legion valens victrix—Aelius Lucanus Captaine of the second legion Augusta, encamped, or did some such thing. For the twentieth legion called Valens victrix, which kept resience at DEVA, that is, Westchester: and the second legion named Augusta, that abode at ISCA, that is, Caer-Leon in Wales, may seeme to have beene employed against the enemies in these parts, and here to have staied and kept their standing campe for a time, and that their Captains or Collonells in memoriall hereof engraved this upon the cragge. The just time I may not easily set downe. Yet to the pointing out of the verie time, there re∣maine to be seen in a rocke there by, these great capitall letters engraven, CN. OCT. COT. COSS. But in the Consular Rolles among all the Paires of Consulls, I can meet with no such names. Yet have I observed thus much, that from the time of Se∣verus unto Gordian and afterwards, the letter A. in all the inscriptions of that age, e∣verie where in this Iland, wanteth the overthwart little line or stroke, and is made thus, A. for A. A. Eden holdeth on his course from hence, not farre from Howgill castle, belonging to the family of the Sandfords : but the Romane high-way goeth straight into the West by Whinfield, Northren men call that a whin, which the Southern men a burre. Brovoniacum. Brougham. a large Parke shaded with trees, hard by BROVONIACUM, standing twentie Italian miles, or seventeene English miles from VERTERAE, as An∣tonine hath set it, who also hath called it Brovocum, like as the book of Notices, Bro∣coniacum ; which specifieth, that a companie or band of Defensors had here their a∣bode. The beautie and buildings of this towne although time hath consumed, yet the name remaineth almost untouched, for we call it Brogham. Here the river Eimot, flowing out of a great lake, & for a good space dividing this shire from Cumberland, receiveth the river Loder into it: neere unto the spring head whereof, hard by Shape, in times past Hepe, a little monasterie built by Thomas the sonne of Gospatrick, sonne of Orms, there is a Well or Fountaine, which after the manner of Euripus ebbeth and floweth many times in a day: also there be huge stones in forme of Pyramides, some 9. foot high, and fourteene foot thick, ranged directly as it were in a row, for a mile in length, with equall distance almost betweene: which may seeme to have beene pitched and erected for to continue the memoriall of some act there atchieved; but what the same was, by the injurie of time it is quite forgotten. Hard by Loder, there is a place bearing the same name, which, like as Stricland neere unto it, hath imparted their names to families of ancient gentrie and worship. Somewhat above, where Lo∣der and Eimot meet in one chanell, in the yeere of our Lord 1602. there was a stone gotten out of the ground, erected in the honour of Constantine the Great, with these words. IMP. C. VAL. CONSTA∣NTINO Pientissimo Augusto. PIENT. AUG. When Eimot hath served a good while for a limit betweene this shire and Cum∣berland, neere unto Isan-parles, Isan-parles. a rocke full well knowne unto the neighbour inhabi∣tants, whereunto nature hath left difficult passage, and there framed sundry caves, and thosefull of winding crankes, a place of safe refuge in time of danger: hee lodg∣eth himselfe after some few miles, both with his owne streame, and with the waters of other rivers also, in Eden, so soone as he hath entertained Blencarne, a brook that boundeth this county on Cumberland side: Neere unto which I have heard there be the strange ruines of an old Castle, Hanging wals of Marke An∣tony. Fines Term. Mich. R. 6. H. 8. Vipounts Armes. Earles of West∣morland. the people call them the hanging walls of Mar∣cantoniby, that is, of Marke Antony, as they would have it. As for such as have borne the title of Westmorland, the first Lord, to my know∣ledge, was Robert de Vipont, who bare Guels, sixe Annulets Or in his coat armour. For King John gave unto him the balliwicke and revenues of Westmorland, by the ser∣vice of foure Knights : whereupon the Cliffords his successors, untill our daies held the office of the Sherifdome of Westmorland. For Robert de Vipont, the last of that name, left behind him only two daughters, Isabel wife to Roger Lord Clifford, and I∣donea married unto Sir Roger Leybourne. Long time after, K. Richard the second created Ralph Nevill of Raby the first Earle of Westmorland, a man of the greatest and most ancient birth of English nobility, as descended from Ucthred Earl of Nor∣thumberland: whose heires successively by his former wife Margaret, daughter to the Earle of Stafford, flourished in that honour, untill that Charles by his wilfull sto∣mack, and wicked conspiracy, casting off his allegeance to Q. Elizabeth, and covering treason under the mantle of religion, most shamefully dishonoured that most noble house, and foully steined his owne reputation by actuall rebellion, in the yeere 1599. Whereupon hee fled into the Low countries, led a miserable life, and died as misera∣bly. The said first Earle, to note so much incidently, by his second wife Catharine, daughter to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, had so faire issue, and the name of Nevill thereby so greatly multiplied, that almost at one and the same time there flou∣rished out, beside the Earle of Westmorland, an Earle of Salisbury, an Earle of War∣wicke, an Earle of Kent, Marquesse Montacute, a Duke of Bedford, Lord Latimer, and Lord Abergevenny, all Nevils. In this shire are conteined Parishes 26. CVMBRIA Sive CVMBERLANDIA Quae olim pars Brigantum CUMBER-LAND. W Estward, Northward from Westmorland lieth CUMBERLAND, the utmost region this way of the realme of England, as that which on the North side boundeth upon Scotland: on the South side and the West the Irish sea beateth upon it: and Eastward a∣bove Westmorland it butteth upon Northumberland. It tooke the name of the inhabitants, who were the true and naturall Bri∣tans, and called themselves in their owne language Kumbri, and Kambri. For the Histories testifie, that the Britans remained here a long time, mau∣gre the English Saxons, howsoever they stormed thereat: yea and Marianus him∣selfe recordeth as much, who tearmed this countrey Cumbrorum terram, that is, Th land of the Cumbri, or Britans: to say nothing of the places, that everie where here beare British names, as Caer-Luel, Caer-dronoc, Pen-rith, Pen-rodoc, &c. which most evidently declare the same, and as cleerly prove mine assertion. The country, although it be somewhat with the coldest, as lying farre North, and seemeth as rough by reason of hills, yet for the varietie thereof it smileth upon the beholders, and giveth contentment to as many as travaile it. For after the rockes bunching out, the mountaines standing thicke together rich of metall mines, and be∣tweene them great meeres stored with all kindes of wilde foule, you come to prettie hills good for pastorage, and well replenished with flockes of sheepe; beneath which againe you meet with goodly plaines spreading out a great way, yeelding come sufficiently. Besides all this, the Ocean driving and dashing upon the shore, affoordeth plentie of excellent good fish, and upbraideth, as it were, the inhabitants thereabouts with their negligence, for that they practise fishing no more than they doe. The South part of this shire is called Copeland, Copeland. and Coupland, for that it beareth up the head aloft with sharpe edged and pointed hills, which the Britans tearme Copa: or, as others would have it, named Copeland, as one would say Coperland, of rich mines of copper therein. In this part, at the very mouth of the river Duden, whereby it is severed apart from Lancashire, Millum castle▪ standeth Millum Castle, belonging to the ancient house of the Hodle∣stones ; from whence as the shore fetcheth about with a bent Northward, two rivers very commodiously enclose within them Ravenglasse, Raven-glas. a station or roade for ships, where also, as I have learned, were to be eene Roman inscriptions: some will have it called in old time Aven-glasse, as one would say, the blew river, and they talke much of King Eueling, Hard-knot neer Wrinofe. that here had his Court and royall palace. One of these ri∣vers named Eske springeth up at the foot of Hard-knot, an high steepe mountaine; in the top whereof were discovered of late huge stones and foundations of a castle, not without great wonder; considering it is so steep and upright, that one can hardly ascend up to it. Somewhat higher, Irt a riveret. Irt a little river maketh way toward the sea, wherein the mus∣cles and cochles, after they have with a kinde of yawning or gaping sucked in dew, which they lust after to conceive by, See Plinie. Pearles. bring forth pearles; or, to speake as the Poet doth, Shell-berries ; which the inhabitants there by search after at a low water, and our Lapidaries and Jewellers buy of the poore needie people for a little, but sell again at an high rate: of these and such like Marbodaeus seemeth to speake in this verse, Gignis & insignes antiqua Britannia baccas. And Britanie of ancient fame Breeds and brings forth pearles of great name. Now by this time the shore extendeth out more and more, and encloseth West∣ward, where it maketh a little promontorie, which the common sort for Saint Bega call St. Bees. Saint Bees. For Bega, a devout and religious Irish woman, led there a solitarie life; unto whose holinesse are ascribed certain vain miracles, as the taming of a wild bull, and the procuring of a mightie deep snow, which in the longest summers day by her praiers fell, and lay thicke upon the vallies and tops of hills. Scarce a mile hence standeth Egremont Castle on the top of an hill, Egremont ca∣stle. Lords of Copeland. Liber Inq. the seat in times past of William de Meschines, unto whom King Henrie the first gave it, to hold by one knights service, and that he should serve at the Kings commandement in the army for Wales and Scotland. Who left behind him a daughter, the wife of William Fitz-Duncan, of the blood roi∣all of Scotland: by whose daughter also the inheritance came into the family of the Lucies: from them likewise by the Moltons and Fitz-waters, the title of Egremont de∣scended unto the Ratcliffes Earles of Sussex. And yet Sir Thomas Percie, through the favour of King Henrie the sixth, enjoyed it for a time, being summoned to the Parlia∣ment by the name of Th. Percie of Egremont. From hence the shore drawing it selfe backe by little and little, and as it appea∣reth by the heapes of rubbish, The sea side fensed. it hath beene fortified all along by the Romanes, wheresoever there was easie landing. For it was the outmost bound of the Ro∣man Empire, and the Scots lay sorest upon this coast, and infested it most, when (as it were with continuall surges of warre) they flowed and flocked hither by heapes out of Ireland: Moresby. and certaine it is that Moresby, a little village where is a roade for ships, was one of these fortifications. For there are many monuments of antiquitie, as vaults under the ground, great foundations, many caves, which they use to tearme Picts-Holes ; many fragments of stones with inscriptions engraven in them are there often times found in the ground: of which upon one I read this, LUCIUS SEVERINUS ORDINATUS, on another, COH. VII. And this Altar I saw lately digged out there, with a little horned image representing Sylvanus, erected to his honour by the second Cohort of the Lingones. Deo Sylvano Cohors secunda Lingonum, cui praest G. Pom∣peius M. Satur∣ninus. DEO SILVAN— COH. II. LING CVI PRAEES— G. POMPEIVS M— SATVRNIN— As also this fragment, which I. Fletcher Lord of the place transcribed out for me, and sent unto mee. — — OB PROSPE. RITATEM CVLMINIS INSTITVTI. Morbium. But no stone hitherto hath beene found, that assureth us that it was MORBIUM, where the Cataphractarii horsemen, or men at armes served, notwithstanding the name in some sort implieth as much. Neither is Hay-castle which I saw hard by, to be passed over with silence, Hay castle. a place verily to be regarded for antiquity sake, which by re∣port of the inhabitants belonged successively in elder time to Gentlemen surnamed Moresby and Distinton. After this, the river Derwent hideth himselfe in the Ocean, which having his first beginning in Borrodale, a valley hemmed in with crooked hills, creepeth betweene the mountains called Derwent Fels ; wherein at Newlands & elsewhere, copper mines were discovered by Thomas Shurland, Copper or brasse mines. and Daniel Hotchstat er, a German of Aus∣purge, in our daies: and yet the same were knowne before, as appeareth by closse rowles of King Henrie the third n. 18. Upon the discoverie of these mines, there was a memorable case in law between the late QUEEN ELIZABETH of sacred memorie, Veines of gold gold and sil∣ver. and Thomas Percie Earl of Northumberland, in whose Lordship they were found: but in regard of the Queenes royall prerogative, and for that there were in them veins of gold and silver, they were adjudged to the Queen. But hereby it is well seene how untrue it was, that Cicero wrote in his Epistles unto Atticus: This is for certaine knowne, saith he, that there is not in the Iland Britaine so much as one scruple of silver. See Ploidens Reports. Neither would Caesar, if he had known of these mines, have written, That the Britans had use of copper brought in to them from other parts beyond sea, seeing that the mines not onely serve all England over, but also affoord great plentie beside, that is carried yeerly forth of the realme. Here also is commonly found that minerall kind of earth, or hardned glittering stone (we call it Black-lead ) with which Painters use to draw their lines, and make pi∣ctures of one colour in their first draughts: which whether it bee Pnigitis or Me∣lanteria, spoken of by Dioscorides, or Ochre, a kind of earth so burnt with heat, that it becommeth blacke, or whether it were unknowne unto the old writers, I cannot cer∣tainly averre, and let others for me search it out. Derwent, after it hath passed through these hills, spreadeth abroad into a large lake, Bede termeth it praegrande stagnum, that is, a very great poole, wherein are three Ilands eminent above the water: The one hath an house in it of the Ratcliffes, a family of Knights degree: the second is in∣habited by the Dutch Minerall men: the third is thought to be that, wherein, as Bede writeth, Saint Herbert lived an Heremeticall life. On the very skirt of this bot∣tome, in a pleasant soile compassed about with deawie hills; and fensed on the North side with that high mountaine Skiddaw, Keswike. lieth Keswike, a little towne which King Edward the first made a mercate, by the procurement of S. Thomas of Derwent∣water Lord of the place, from whom it lineally descended to the family of the Ratcliffs : It was well knowne many yeeres agoe by reason of the mines of copper, as we may see in a certaine Charter of King Edward the fourth, and is at this day much inha∣bited by Minerall men, who have here their smelting house by Derwent side, which with his forcible streame, and their ingenuous inventions, serveth them in notable steed for easie bellowes workes, hammer workes, forge workes, and sawing of boords, Skiddaw hill. not without admiration of such as behold it. As for that mountain Skiddaw aforesaid, it riseth up to such an height with two heads like unto Parnassus, and with a kind of emulation beholdeth Scruffel hill before it in Anandale within Scotland, that from these two mountaines, according as the mistie clouds arise or fall, the people there by dwelling, make their prognostication of the change of weather, and com∣monly sing this note. If Skiddaw hath a cap, Scruffell wots full well of that. Like as there goes also this usuall by-word concerning the heigth as well of this hill, as of other twaine in this tract. Skiddaw, Lauuellin, and Castic and, Are the highest hills in all England. From hence Derwent sometimes within a narrow channell, other whiles with a broader streame, speedeth him very fast Northward, to entertaine Cockar. Which when they meete, doe encompasse almost round about Cokarmouth a mercate towne of good wealth, and a castle of the Earles of Northumberland. The towne is built faire enough, but standeth somewhat with the lowest betweene two hills: upon the one of which the Church is seated, and upon the other right over against it, a very strong castle, the gate whereof carrieth in the front the Armes of the Molions, Humfranvills, Lucies, & Percies. Opposite unto this, beyond the river two miles off, lieth the carcase of an ancient castle, called Papcastle, which by a num∣ber of monuments layeth claime to bee a Romane antiquitie: whether this were Guasmoric, Guasmoric. which, as Ninnius writeth, King Vortigern built neere unto Luguballhia, and the Englishmen of old time called Palme-castle, I cannot so easily affirme. Where among many monuments of antiquitie, was found a broad vessell of a greenish stone, artificially engraven with little images: which whether it had bin a Laver to wash in, or a font, or as one calleth it, Sacrarium Regenerationis, for which purpose it serveth now at Brid-kirke, that is, at S. Brigids Church hard by, I dare not say. But I have read that Fonts were adorned with the pictures of holy men, to the end that such as were baptized might afterward have before their eies, whose deeds they were to imitate, as saith Pontius Paulinus. Epist. ad Sever. For in the first plantation of Christianitie among the Gen∣tiles, such onely as were of full age, after they were instructed in the Principles of Christian Religion, were admitted to Baptisme; and that but twice in the yeere, at Easter and Whitsontide, Catechumeni, or hearers. except upon urgent necessitie. At which times, they which were to be baptised were attired in white garments exorcised, and exsuffled, with sundrie ceremonies, which I leave to the learned in Christian antiquities: but this Font we speake of was thus inscribed. But what they signifie, or what nations characters they should be, I know not, let the learned determine thereof. The first and eighth differ not much from that which in the time of the Emperour Constantine the great, Christians used for the name of Christ: the rest in forme, though not in sound, come very neere unto those which are seene in the tombe of Gormon, a King of the Danes, at Ielling in Denmark, the which Peter of Lindeberge did put forth, in the yeere 1591. These places which erewhile I have named, together with a fourth part of the Ba∣ronie of Egremond, Wigton, Lewsewater, Aspatric, Uldal, &c. a right faire and goodly inheritance, Maud Lucie (who was the heire of Anthony Molton or de Lucie her bro∣ther) gave unto her husband Henry Percie Earle of Northumberland; and albeit she had no issue by him, yet made she the family of the Percies her heires, upon this con∣dition, That they should beare quarterly the Lucies Armes, Armes of the Lucies and Percies. sz. three Pikes. Luces Argent in a shield Gueles, with their owne Armes: or that I may use the words of the originall, On condition, to give their own armes Gueles with three Luces. Luces Argent, together with the Armes of Percy, Or, a Lion Azure quarterly ; and the same condition by a fine le∣vied. Afterwards Derwent having gathered his waters into one streame, entreth into the Ocean at Wirkinton, a place famous for taking of Salmons, and now the seat of the ancient family of the Curwens Knights, Culwen, com∣monly Cur∣wen. who fetch their discent from Gospatric Earle of Northumberland, and their sirname they tooke by covenant and compositi∣on from Culwen a family in Galloway, the heire whereof they had married; and here have they a stately house built Castle-like, and from whom (without offence or vanity be it spoken) my selfe am descended by the mothers side. From hence some thinke there was a wall made to defend the shore in conveni∣ent places, for foure miles, or thereabout, by Stilico the potent Commander in the Roman state, what time as the Scots annoyed these coasts out of Ireland. For thus speaketh Britaine of her selfe, in Claudian. Under Hono¦rius and Arc¦dius. Me quo que vicinis pereuntem gentibus, in quit, Munivit Stilico, totam cùm Scotus Hibernem Movit, & infesto spumavit remige Thetis. And me likewise at hands (quoth she) to perish, through despight Of neighbour-Nations, Stilico fensed against their might, What time the Scots all Ireland mov'd offensive armes to take, &c. There are also as yet, such continued ruines and broken walls to bee seene as farre as to Elne Mouth, which river holding no long course, hath at his spring head Ierby, a good big mercate towne standing upon it. I judge it to have beene that ARBEIA, where the Baccarii Tigrienses kept their standing guard: and at his mouth Elenbor∣rough, that is, the Burgh upon Elen, where the first band of the Dolmatians together with their Captaine in old time made their abode. The neere resemblance of the name Elenborough with OLENACUM, where the First Herculean Wing lay in Gar∣rison in the time of Theodosius the younger, Olenacum. is some motive to thinke that this was that OLENACUM, but yet I dare not affirme it. Seated it was upon the height of a hill, and hath a goodly prospect farre into the Irish sea: but now Corne growes where the towne stood; neverthelesse many expresse footings thereof are evidently to be seene: The ancient vaults stand open, and many altars, stones with inscripti∣ons, and Statues are here gotten out of the ground. Which I. Sinhous, a very ho∣nest man, in whose grounds they are digged up, keepeth charily, and hath placed or∣derly about his house. In the mids of his yard there standeth erected a most beauti∣full foure square Altar of a reddish stone, right artificially in antique worke engraven, five foot or thereabouts high, with an inscription therein of an excellent good let∣ter: but loe the thing it selfe all whole, and every side thereof, as the draught was most lively taken out by the hand of Sir Robert Cotton of Connington Knight, a sin∣gular lover of antiquity, what time as hee and I together, of an affectionate love to illustrate our native countrey, made a survey of these coasts, in the yeere of our re∣demption 1599. not without the sweet food and contentment of our mindes. And I cannot chuse but with thankfull heart remember that very good and worthy Gentle∣man; not only in this regard that most kindly he gave us right courteous and friendly entertainment, but also for that being himselfe well learned, he is a lover of ancient literature, and most diligently preserveth these inscriptions, which by others that are unskilfull and unlettered be straight waies defaced, broken, and converted to other u∣ses, to exceeding great prejudice and detriment of antiquity. In the inscription all is as plaine as may bee; onely in the last line save one (Et and AEDES) are read by implication of the letters: the last part being maimed, may haply be amended in this wife, DECURIONUM ORDINEM RESTITUIT, &c. These Decurions were in free townes (called Municipia ) the same that Senators were in Rome and Colonies, Decuriones. Isidor. l. 9. c. 4. so called, because they executed the office of Curiae, where∣upon they were named also Curiales, who had the ordering and managing of civill offices. On the back-side of this Altar in the upper edge & border thereof, are read, as you see, these two words, VOLANTII VIVAS; which doe perplexe me, neither can I ex∣pound them, unlesse the Decurions, Gentlemen, and Commons (for of these three states consisted a Municipium, or free Corporation) added this as a well-wishing, and votive inscription unto G. Cornelius Peregrinus (who restored houses, habitati∣ons and Decurions) that so bounteous and beneficiall a man VOLANTII VIVE∣RET, that is, might live at Volantium. Hence I suppose, if conjecture may carrie it, that VOLANTIUM in times past was the name of the place. Volantium. Underneath are engra∣ven instruments belonging to sacrifice, an Axe or Cleaver, and a chopping Knife. On the left side, a Mallet and a great Bason: in that on the right side, a platter, a dish, and a peare, if my sight serve mee well; or as others would have it, a drinking cup or jugge; for these were vessels pertaining to sacrifice: and others beside, as a Cruet, an Incense pan or Censer, a footlesse pot, the Priests miter, &c. which I have seene ex∣presly portraied upon the sides of other altars in this tract. The second Altar, which I have here adjoined, was digged up at Old Carlile, and is now to be seene in the Bar∣houses house at Ilkirk: an inscription it had with that intricate connexion of letters one in another, as the Graver hath here very lively portraied, and thus it seemeth they are to be read. Iovi Optimo Maximo. Under Com∣modus Anno Christi 193. Ala Augusta ob virtutem appellata, cui praest Publius Aelius, Publii filius Sergia Magnus de Mursa ex Pannonia inferiore Praefectus. Aproniano (& fortasse) Bradua Consulibus. Unto most gracious and mightie Jupiter. The Wing named for their vertue Augusta, the Captaine whereof is Publius Aelius, sonne of Publius Magnus of Mursa, from out of the lower Pannonia, Praefect. When Apronianus, and (haply) Bradua were Consuls. The third Altar, with an inscription to Belatucadrus the tutelar God of the place, is in this wise to be read. Belatucadro Iulius Civilis Optio, id est, Excubiis Praefectus, votum solvit libens, merito. Unto Belatucadrus, Iulius-Civilis Opi o, that is, Prefect over the watch and ward, hath performed his vow willingly and duly. In the fourth Altar, which is of all the rest the fairest, there is no difficultie at all, and this is the tenour of it. Diis, Deabus{que} Publius Posthumius Acilianus Praefectus Cohortis primae Delmatarum. To the Gods and Goddesses, Publius Posthumius Acilianus, Prefect or Captain of the first Cohort of the Dalmatians. Such Altars as these (neither neede we think much to observe those ancient rites, which now long since the most sacred Christian religion hath chased away, and ba∣nished quite) they were wont to crowne with greene branches, Gentiles or Heathen al∣tars. like as they did the beasts for sacrifice, and themselves: and then they used with frankincense and wine to make supplication, See in Lanca∣shire▪ to kill, and offer their sacrifices: yea, and their manner was to enhuile or anoint their very altars all over. Concerning the demolishing and over∣throw of which, as Christian religion came in place and began to prevaile, Pruden∣tius the Christian Poet wrote thus. Exercere manum non poenitet, & lapis illic Si stetit antiquus, quem cingere sueverat error Fasciolis, aut gallinae pulmone rigare, Frangitur.— Men thought not much their hands thus to employ, And if in place some antique stone there stood, Which folke were wont in errour, with much joy To garnish round with ribbands, and with blood Of Hens to imbrue, they brake it in that mood. These inscriptions likewise hereunder I saw there. Publii filius. PROSA— ANTONINI AV-PII F— P. AVLVS P. F. PALATINA POSTHVMIVS ACILIANVS PRAEF. COH. I. DELMATAR. Diis Manibus D M INGENVI. AN. X. IVL. SIMPLEX PATER Faciendum curavit. F C. D M. MORI REGIS FILII HEREDES EIVS SVBSTITVE RVNT VIX. A. LXX. HICEXSEGERE FATA —ENVS SC GERMA— —S REG VIX. AN— S VIX AN— —IX— D M LVCA. VIX ANN. IS XX. D M IVLIA MARTIM A. VIX. AN XII III D. XX. H. There is a stone also here seene, workmanly cut, and erected for some victorie of the Emperours; in which two winged Genii hold up betweene them a guirland, as here is represented. That is, for the victorie of the Augusti (or Emperours) our Lords. When the shore hath passed on right forward a little way from hence, it bend∣eth so backe againe with an arme of the sea retiring inward, that it may seeme to bee that MORICAMBE which Ptolomee setteth here, Moricambe. the nature of the place and the name doe so just agree. For a crooked creeke it is of salt water, and Moricambe in the British tongue signifieth a crooked sea. Hard by this, David the first King of Scots built the Abbey de Ulmo, Holme Cul∣train. commonly called Holme Cultrain: and the Abbots thereof erected Ulstey a fortresse neere unto it, for a treasurie and place of suretie to lay up their books, charters, and evidences, against the sodain invasions of the Scot∣tish: wherein the secrets workes, they say, of Michael the Scot, lie in conflict with mothes; Michael Sco∣tus. which Michael professing here a religious life, was so wholly possessed with the studie of the Mathematicks and other abstruse arts, about the yeere of our Lord 1290. that being taken of the common people for a Necromancer, there went a name of him (such was their credulitie) that hee wrought divers wonders and mira∣cles. Beneath this Abbey, the brooke called Waver runneth into the said arme of the sea; which brook taketh into it the riveret Wiza, at the head whereof lye the ve∣ry bones and pitifull reliques of an ancient Citie: which sheweth unto us, that there is nothing upon earth, but the same is subject to mortalitie. The neighbours call it at this day Old Carlile. What name it had in old time I know not, unlesse it were CASTRA EXPLORATORUM, Castra Explo∣ratorum. that is, The Espialls or Discoverers Castle. The distance put downe by Antonine (who doth not so much seeke after the shortest waies, See as touching the Areans af∣terward in the Picts Wall. as reckon up the places of greater note and name) as well from Bulgium as Lugo-vallum suiteth thereto verie aptly; the situation also to discover and descry afar off is passing fit and commodious: for seated it is upon the top of a good high hill, from whence a man may easily take a full view of all the country round about. How∣beit, most certaine it is that the wing of Horse-men, which for their valour was na∣med AUGUSTA, Ala Augusta Gordiana at Il-Kirk. and AUGUSTA GORDIANA, kept resiance here in Gordian the Emperours time, as appeareth evidently by these inscriptions, which I saw hard by. Iovi optimo maximo. I O M. ALA AUG. OB —RTUT. APPEL. CUI PRAEEST TIB. CL. TIB. F. P IN- G- N JUSTINUS PRAEF. Iovi optimo maximo. FUSCIANO II SILANO II COS. DM MABLI NIVSSEC VNDVS Iovi optimo maximo. EQUIS ALE AUG STE STIP This votive altar also of a rude stone was erected for the happie health of the Em∣perour Gordian the third, and his wife Furia Sabina Tranquilla, and their whole fami∣ly, by the troup of horsemen surnamed Augusta Gordiana, when Aemilius Chrispinus a native of Africa governed the same under Nonnius Philippus Lievtenant generall of Britaine in the yeere of Christ 243. as appeareth by the Consuls therein specified. An. Christ. 243 I O M PRO SALUTE IMPERATORIS M. ANTONI GORDIANI. P. F. INVICTI AUG ET SABINIAE TUR IAE TRANQUILE CONJUGI EJUS TO TA QUE DOMU DIVIN. EORUM A LA AUG. GORDIA. OB VIRTUTEM APPELLATA POSUIT: CUI PRAEEST AEMILIUS CRISPINUS PRAEF. EQQ. NATUS IN PRO AFRICA DE TUIDRO SUB CUR. NONNII PH LIPPI LEG- AUG. PROPRETO— ATTICO ET PRETEXTATO COSS. From hence also were altars brought, which are erected in the high way by Wig∣ton, Wigton. in the sides whereof are to bee seene a drinking cup or mazar, a footlesse pot, a mallet, a boll &c. all vessels appertaining to sacrifice. But time hath so worn out the letters, that nothing can be read. And not farre from hence just by the high street way there was digged up a long rude stone in manner of a columne which we saw at Thoresby, Thoresby. with this inscription, to the honour of Philip the Emperour and his sonne, who flourished about the yeere of our Lord 248. IMP CAES. M. JUL PHILIPPO PIO FELI CI AUG ET M. JUL. PHI LIPPO NOBILIS SIMO CAES TR. P. COS— This also with others Oswald Dikes a learned minister of Gods word copied out for me, and now is to be seene in the house of T. Dikes Gentleman at Wardal. DEO SANCTO BELA TUCADRO AURELIUS DIATOVA For Aram ex vot . ARAE X VOTO POSUIT LL. MM. Likewise another such like altar to a private tutelar God of the place, was there found, with this unperfect inscription. DEO CE AIIO AUR M RTI. ET MS ERURACIO PRO SE ET SUIS. V.S. LL. M. Besides an infinite number of pety images, statues of horsemen, Aegles, Lions, Ganimedes, and many other monuments of antiquity, which are daily discovered. Something higher a little promontory shooteth out, Which the Scots call Sol∣way Frith. and a great frith or arme of the Sea lieth under it, being now the common limit confining England and Scot∣land, serving in times past to make a separation betweene the Romane Province, and the Picts. Blatum-Bulgi∣um. Upon this standeth that ancient town, BLATUM-BULGIUM (happily of Butch a Britaine word, that signifieth a separation) from which, as from the most remote place, and the limit of the Roman province, Antonine the Emperour begin∣neth his journies through Britaine. Bulnesse▪ The inhabitants at this day call it Bulnesse: and as small a village as it is, yet hath it a pile, and in token of the antiquity thereof, be∣sides the tracts of streets, ruinous walls, and an haven now stopped up with mud; there led a paved high-way from hence along the sea-shore, as farre as to Elen Bor∣rough, if we may relie upon the report of the by-dwellers. Beyond this a mile (as is to bee seene by the foundations at a nepe tide) beganne that WALL, The beginning of the Picts Wall. the most renowned worke of the Romanes, which was the bound in times past of the Romane province; raised of purpose to seclude and keepe out the barbarous nations, that in this tract, were evermore barking and baying (as an anci∣ent writer saith) about the Roman Empire. I marvailed at first, why they built here so great fortifications, Solway Frith. considering that for eight miles, or thereabout, there lieth oppo∣site a very great frith and arme of the sea: but now I understand, that at every ebbe the water is so low, that the borderers and beast-stealers may easily wade over. That the form of these shores hath bin changed, it doth evidently appeare by the tree roots covered over with sand a good way off from the shore, which oftentimes at a low ebbe are discovered with the windes. Trees within the ground. I know not whether I may relate here, which the inhabitants reported concerning trees without boughes under the ground, oftentimes found out here in the mosses, by the direction of dew in summer: for they have observed that the dew never standeth on that ground under which they lye. By the same Frith, more within the land standeth Drumbough Castle, belong∣ing of later time to the Lords of Dacre, a station in times past of the Romans. Some will have it to have beene EXPLORATORUM CASTRA, notwithstanding the distance utterly controuleth it. There was also another station of the Romans beside it, Burgh upon sands. which now being changed into a new name is called Burgh upon Sands: whence the territory adjoyning is named the Barony of Burgh, the which R. Meschines, 1307. Called Mor∣vils de Burgh upon Sands. Lord of Cumberland, gave unto Robert de Trivers: but from him it came to the Morvils: the last of which house, named Hugh, left behind him a daughter, who by her second husband, Thomas de Molton had issue Thomas Molton, Lord of this place: whose sonne Thomas, by marriage with the heire of Hubert de Vaulx adjoyned Gilles-land to his possessions: Liber. Inq. which in the end were devolved all unto Ranulph Dacre, who married M. the heire of Moulton. But for no one thing was this little Burgh upon Sands more famous, than that King Edward the first, Edward the first. that triumphant Conquerour of his enemies, was here taken out of this world by untimely death. A right noble and worthy Prince, to whom God proportioned most princely presence and personage, as a right wor∣thy seat to entertaine so heroicall a minde. For hee not onely in regard of fortitude and wisedome, but also for a beautifull and a personall presence was in all points an∣swerable to the height of royall majesty: whom fortune also in the very prime and flowre of his age inured to many a warre, and exercised in most dangerous troubles of the State, whiles she framed and fitted him for the Empire of Britain: which he, being once crowned King, managed and governed in such wise, that having subdued the Welsh, and vanquished the Scots, hee may most justly bee counted the second or∣nament of Great Britaine. Solway Frith. Under this Burgh, within the very Frith where the salt water ebbeth and floweth, the Englishmen and Scotish, by report of the inhabi∣tants, fought with their fleets at full Sea, and also with their horsemen and footmen at the ebbe. A thing which may seeme no lesse marvellous than that which Plinie hath reported, not without wonder, of the like place in Caramania. This arme of the sea both nations call Solway Frith, of Solway a towne in Scotland standing upon it. The river Itu∣na, or Eden. History of Malrosse. But Ptolomee more truely tearmeth it ITUNA: For Eden, that notable river, which wandreth through Westmorland, and the inner parts of this shire, powreth forth into it a mighty masse of water, having not yet forgotten what adoe it had to passe away struggling and wrestling as it did, among the carcasses of free-butters, ly∣ing dead in it on heapes, in the yeere of salvation 1216. when it swallowed them up loaden with booties out of England, and so buried that rabble of robbers under his waves. This river Eden when it is entred into this shire, receiveth from the West the ri∣ver Eimot, flowing out of Ulse, a great lake heretofore mentioned: neer unto the bank whereof, Dacre. Barons Dacre. hard by the riveret Dacor, standeth Dacre Castle, of signall note, for that it hath given sirname to the honourable family of the Barons Dacre ; and mentioned anciently by Bede, for that it had a monastery in those dayes; as also by William of Malmesbury, in regard that Constantine King of Scots, and Eugenius or Ewain King of Cumberland, yeelded themselves there, together with their kingdomes, unto A∣thelstane King of England, upon condition to be protected by him. Not much higher, and not farre from the confluence of Eimot and Loder, where is seene that round trench of earth, which the countrey people tearme Arthurs Table, stands Penrith, which is, if you interpret it out of the British language, The Red head or hill (for the soile, and the stones there are of a reddish colour:) but commonly cal∣led Perith: a little towne, and of indifferent trade, fortified on the West side with a castle of the Kings, which in the reigne of King Henry the sixth was repaired out of the ruines of a Romane fort thereby called Maburg, adorned with a proper Church: and the mercate place is large, with an edifice of timber therein, for the use of those that resort thither to mercate, garnished with Beares at a ragged staffe, which was the devise of the Earles of Warwicke. It belonged in times past unto the Bi∣shops of Durham: but when Antony Bec the Bishop, overweening himselfe with over much wealth, waxed proud and insolent, King Edward the first (as wee finde in Durham book) took from him Werk in Tividale, Perith, and the Church of Simond∣burne. But for the commodious use of this Towne, Perith. William Stricland, Bi∣shop of Carlile, descended from a worshipfull Family in this tract, at his owne charges caused a channell for a water-course to be made out of Petter-rill, that is, the little Petter, Called in old time Haia de Plompton. which neer unto the bank had Plumpton park, a very large plot of ground which the Kings of England allotted in old time for wild beasts, but King Henry the eighth disparked it, and wisely appointed it for habitation of men, as be∣ing in the very merches well neere, where the Realmes of England and Scot∣land confine one upon the other. Just by this place I saw many remaines of a decayed towne, which they there for the vicinity thereof, doe now call Old Perith: I for my part would deeme it to be PETRIANAE. Petriana. For the fragment of an antique inscription erected by ULPIUS TRAIANUS, EMERITUS an old discharged and pensionary souldier of the Petreian wing, doth convince and prove that the wing Petriana made abode here. But behold both it and others which wee copied out here. — GADUNO ULP TRAI EM. AL. PET MARTIUS. Annos. F P. C. D M. AICETU OS MATER VIXIT Haply, Faci∣endum procu∣ravit. A XXXXV ET LATTIO FIL. VIX A XII. LIMISIUS CONJU. ET FILIAE PIENTISSIMIS POSUIT. D M FL. MARITO SEN IN Peradventure in Cohorte. C. CARVETIOR QUESTORIO VIXIT AN XXXXV MARTIOLA FILIA ET HERES PONEN Dum. —CURAVIT. D M. CROTILO GERMANUS VIX ANIS XXVI. GRECA VIX ANIS IIII. VINDICIANUS Fratri & fi∣liae Titulum posuit. FRA. ET FIL. TIT. PO. After that Eden hath now given Eimot entertainment, hee turneth his course Northward, by both the Salkelds, watering as hee goes obscure small villages, and fortresses. Amongst which at the lesse Salkeld, there bee erected in manner of a circle seventy seven stones, every one ten foot high, and a speciall one by it selfe before them, at the very entrance riseth fifteene foot in height. This stone the common people thereby dwelling, name Long Megge, like as the rest, her daugh∣ters. And within that ring or circle, are heapes of stones, under which, they say, lye covered the bodies of men slaine. And verily there is reason to thinke that this was a monument of some victory there atchieved, for no man would deeme that they were erected in vaine. From thence passeth Eden by Kirk-Oswald, Kirk Oswald. consecrated to Saint Oswald, the possession in old time of that Sir Hugh Morvill, who with his associates slew Tho∣mas Archbishop of Canterbury: and in memoriall of this fact, the sword which hee then used, Armanthwayt. Corby castle. was kept here a long time: and so goeth on by Armanthwayte, a Castle of the Skeltons, by Corby Castle; belonging to the worthy and ancient family of the Salkelds, Wetherall. well advanced by marriage with the heire of Rosgill ; by We∣therall, sometime a little Abbey or Cell, which acknowledged the Abbey of Saint Mary in Yorke for her mother; where within a rocke are to bee seene certaine lit∣tle habitations or cabbins hewed hollow for a place of sure refuge in this dangerous countrey. Virosidum. Thence by Warwic (VIROSIDUM, as I supposed) where the sixt Cohort of the Nervians in old time held their station within the limit of that Wall a∣gainst the Picts and Scots: and there in the latter age was built a very strong bridge of stone, Linstock. Crosby. at the charges of the Salkelds and Richmonds: by Linstock castle al∣so belonging to the Bishop of Carlile in the Barony of Crosby, which Waldeof, the sonne of Earle Gospatrick, Lord of Allerdale granted unto the church of Carlile. And now by this time Eden being ready to lodge himselfe in his owne arme of the sea, ta∣keth in two rivers at once, namely, Peterill & Caud, which keeping an equall distance asunder march along from the South, and hold as it were a parallel pace just toge∣ther. By Peterill, beside PETRIANAE, which I spake of, standeth Greistock, a castle be∣longing not long since to an honorable house, which derived their first descent from one Ranulph Fitz-Walter: Greystock. The ancient Genealogie. Barons de Greystock. of which line William, called de Greistock, wedded Mary a daughter and one of the coheires of Sir Roger Merley, Lord of Morpath: and hee had a sonne named John, who being childlesse, by licence of King Edward the first, conveighed his inheritance to Ralph Granthorpe, the sonne of William, and his Aunts sonne by the fathers side: whose male progeny flourished a long time in honor with the title of Lord Greistock, but about King Henry the seventh his dayes expired and came to an end, and so the inheritance came by marriage unto the Barons of Dacre: and the female heires generall of the last Baron Dacre, were married unto Philip Earle of Arundell, and Lord William Howard, sonnes of Thomas Howard, late Duke of Norfolke. Mines of Brasse. Upon Caud, beside the coper mines neere unto Caudbeck, standeth Highgate, a ca∣stle of the Richmonds, of ancient descent, and a proper fine castle of the Bishops of Carlile, Congavata. called the Rose castle: it seemeth also that CONGAVATA was hereabout, in which the second band of the Lergi served in garison: for Congavata in the British tongue signifieth, The valley by Gavata, which now is called short Caud. But the very place where this towne stood I cannot precisely point out. Betwixt the meeting of these rivers, Carlile. the ancient City Carlile is passing commodiously and pleasantly seated, garded on the North side with the chanell of Eden, on the East with Peterill, on the West with Caud: and beside these naturall fenses it is fortified with strong walls of stone, with a castle and a citadell, as they tearme it. In fashion it lyeth somewhat long, running out from West to East: on the West side is the Castle of a good large compasse, which King Richard the third, as appeareth by his Armes, repaired. In the midst almost of the City, riseth on high the Cathedrall Church, the upper part whereof being the newer, is very artificially and curiously wrought: yet the nether part is much more ancient. But on the East side it is defended with the Citadel, that K. Henry the eighth built strongly with sundry bulwarks. The Romans and Britans called this city LUGU-VALLUM, Luguvallum. and LUGU-BALLIUM, or LUGU-BALIA: the Eng∣lish Saxons, Luell, as Bede witnesseth: Ptolomee, as some think, LEUCOPIBIA. Nin∣nius, Caer Lualid: the ridiculous prophesies of the Britans, tearmed it The City of Du∣ball, we, Carlile, and Latine writers by a newer name, Carleolum. For our Historiogra∣phers accord with common consent, that Luguballia and Carleolum were the same. But in searching out the Etymology thereof, good God, how hath Leland bestirred him, being in the end driven to this point, that he thought verily Eden was called Lugus, and Ballum came from Vallis, that is, a vale, so that Lugu-ballum soundeth as much as the Vale by Lugus. But I, if so bee I may also hatch a conjecture, would rather suppose, but without prejudice, that the said termination Vallum and Vallia, are derived from that most famous military Vallum or Trench, that standeth appa∣rent a little from the City. For that Picts Wall, which was afterwards set upon the Trench, or rampire of Severus, appeareth somewhat beyond the River Eden, which now hath a woodden bridge over it, neere unto a little village called Stanwicke, and went over the very river just against the Castle: where within the chanell of the river, mighty stones, the remaines thereof, are yet extant. Also Lugus or Lucus amongst the ancient Celis, or Gaules, who spake the same language that once the Britans did, Lucus and Lugus what they signifie among the Britans and old Gauls. signifieth a Tower, as we may learn by Pom∣ponius Mela. For that which in Antonine is named LUGO-AUGUSTI, hee cal∣leth TURRIM AUGUSTI, that is, The Tower of Augustus: so that Luga-Vallum is as much to say, as the Tower or Fort by the wall. From this originall if the Frenchmen had derived Lugudunum, as it were, The tower on an hill ; and Lucotecia, (for so in old time they called that city which we do Lutetia ) that is Paris, Lugdunum. Lucotecia or Lutetia in France. The old Itine∣rarie lately im∣printed, shew∣eth that Lug∣dunum impli∣eth, a Desirable hill. as it were, The faire Tower, (for so those words signifie in the British tongue) peradventure they had ai∣med neerer unto the marke, than in fetching the one from Lutum, that is, Dirt, and that other from Lugdus an imagined King. That this Carlile flourished in the time of the Romanes, divers tokens of antiquity now and then digged up there, and the famous mention of it in those dayes, doe sufficiently prove. After the furious outra∣ges also of the Picts and Scots were allayed, it retained some part still of the ancient dignity, and was counted a City. For in the yeere of Christ 619. Egfrid King of Northumberland passed a gift unto that holy Saint Cuthbert, in this forme, I have given unto him also the City called Luguballia, and 5. miles round about it: at which time also it was walled strong. The Citizens, saith Bede, brought Cuthbert to see the walls of their City, and a fountain or Well in it, built in times past according to the won∣derfull workmanship of the Romanes: who at the very same time, as saith the book of Durham, ordained there a Covent of Nuns, with an Abbesse and Schooles. Afterwards being defaced and brought to exceeding ruin by the Danes, it lay about 200. yeeres buried under his owne ashes: untill it began againe to flourish under the govern∣ment and favour of King William Rufus, who repaired it with new edifices, built the Castle, and placed a Colony there first of Flemmings (whom streightwaies upon better advice he removed into Wales) but afterwards of Southerne Englishmen. Then was there seen, as William of Malmesbury writeth, A dining chamber after the Roman fashion, built of stone, & arched with vaults, so that no spitefull force of tempests, nor furious flame of fire could ever shake or hurt it: in the forefront whereof was this In∣scription, MARII VICTORIAE, that is, o the victory of Marius. This Marius some will needs have to be Arviragus the Britan: others, that Marius, who being proclai∣med Emperour against Gallienus, was named to bee of wonderfull strength, that as writers report of him, He had in his fingers no veines, but all sinewes. Yet have I lear∣ned, that another, making mention of this stone, saith it was not inscribed MARII VICTORIAE, but MARTI VICTORI, that is, To victorious Mars, which perhaps may better content some, and seeme to come nearer unto the truth. Or de Mice∣nis. Carlile being now better peopled, and of greater resort, had, as they write, for Earle▪ or more truly for Lord thereof, Ralph Or de Mice∣nis. Meschines ; from whom came the Earles of Chester: and at the same time, being raised by King Henry the first to an Episcopall dignity, had Ar∣talph for the first Bishop. Which the Monks of Durham have written was prejudici∣all to their Church, when Ranulph (say they) Bishop of Durham was banished, and the Church had none to defend her, certain Bishops laid Carlile and Tividale to their Dioece∣ses. But how the Scotish under the reign of Stephen won this City, and King Henry the second recovered it: how also King Henry the third committed the castle of Car∣lile and the County to Robert Vipont: how likewise in the yeere 1292. it was burnt, together with the Cathedrall Church and the Suburbs: and how Robert Bri King of Scots, in the yeere 1315. land siege unto it in vaine, you may finde in the common Chronicles. And yet it seemes it would quit my paines to adjoyne here two inscrip∣tions that I saw here, the one in Thomas Aglion by his house, neere unto the Citadell, but made in the worse age. DIIS MANIBU SMARCI TROJANI AUGUSTINANI Tumulum. TUM. FA CIENDUM CUR A VIT AFEL. AMMILLUSIMA CONJUX Carissima. KARISS. Whereunto is adjoined the image of a man of Armes on horsebacke, armed at all peeces, with a launce in his hand. As for the other, it standeth in the garden of Tho∣mas Middleton, in a very large and faire letter, thus. LEG. VI VIC. P. F. G. P. R. F. Which is, as I ghesse, Legio Sexta, Victrix, Pia, Felix: the rest let some other decipher. Andrew Har∣cla Earle of Carlile. The onely Earle that Carlile had, was Sir Andrew de Harcla, whom King Edward the second created Earle (that I may speake out of the very originall instrument of his Creation) for his laudable & good service performed against Thomas Earle of Lan∣caster, and other his abetters, in vanquishing the Kings enemies and disloiall subjects, & in delivering them up into the Kings hands when they were vanquished, gi t with a sword, and created Earle under the honour and name of the Earle of Carlile: Who notwith∣standing proved a wretched Traitour himselfe, unthankfull and disloyally false both to his Prince and country: and being afterwards apprehended, was with shame and reproach paied duly for the desert of his perfidious ingratitude, degraded in this ma∣ner: first by cutting off his spurres with an hatchet, afterwards disgirded of his mili∣tary Or girdle. Belt: then dispoiled of his shooes and gantlets: last of all, and was drawne hanged, beheaded, and quartered. As for the position of Carlile, the Meridian is distant from the utmost line of the West 21. degrees and 31. minutes; and elevation of the North pole 54. degrees and 55. minutes: and so with these encomiasticall verses of M. I. Ionston, Ibid Carlile adue. CARLEOLUM. Romanis quondam statio tutissima signis, Ultima{que} Ausonidum meta, labos{que} Ducum Especula laiè vicinos prospicit agros, Hic ciet & pugnas, arcet & inde metus. Gens acri ingenio, studiis asperrima belli, Doctaque bellaci fig ere tela manu. Scotorum Reges quondam tenuere beati, Nunc iterum priscis additur imperiis. Quid? Romane putas extrema hîc limina mundi? Mundum retrò alium surgere nonne vides? Sit vidisse satis; docuit nam Scotica virtus Immensis animis hîc posuisse modum. CARLILE. Unto the Romane legions sometimes the surest Station, The farthest bound and Captaines toile of that victorious nation. From prospect high, farre all abroad it lookes to neighbour fields: Hence fight and skirmish it maintaines, and thence all danger shields. People quicke witted, fierce in field, in martiall feats well seene, Expert likewise right skilfully to fight with weapons keene. Whilom the Kings of Scots it held, whiles their state stood upright, And once againe to ancient crowne it now reverts by right. What? Romane Cesar thinkest thou the world hath here an end? And seest thou not another world behind doth yet extend? Well maist thou see this and no more: for Scotish valour taught Such haughty mindes to gage themselves, and here to make default. If you now crosse over the river Eden, you may see hard by the banke Rowcliffe, a little castle erected not long since by the Lords de Dacres for the defence of their Tenants. And above it the two rivers, Eske and Leven, running jointly together en∣ter at one out-gate into the Solway Frith. As for Eske, he rumbleth down out of Scot∣land, and for certaine miles together confesseth himselfe to bee within the English dominion, and entertaineth the river Kirsop, where the English and Scottish parted asunder of late, not by waters, but by mutuall feare one of another, having made passing good proofe on both sides of their great valour and prowesse. Neere this river Kirsop, where is now seene by Nether-By a little village with a few cotta∣ges in it, where are such strange and great ruines of an ancient City, and the name of Eske running before it doth sound so neare, that wee may imagine AESICA stood there: wherein the Tribune of the first band of the Astures kept watch and ward in old time against the Northren enemies. But now dwelleth here the chiefe of the Grayhams family, Grayhams. very famous among the Borderers for their martiall disposition: and in a wall of his house this Romane inscription is set up, in memoriall of Hadrian the Emperour, by the Legion surnamed Augusta Secunda. IMP. CAES. TRA. HADRIANO AUG. LEG. II. AUG. F. But where the River Lidd and Eske conjoine their streames, Barony of Liddel. Liddesdale. there was sometimes, as I have heard, Liddel castle, and the Barony of the Estotevils, who held lands in Cornage; which Earle Ranulph, as I read in an old Inquisition, gave unto Turgill Brun∣das: But from Estotevill it came hereditarily unto the Wakes, and by them unto the Earles of Kent of the blood roiall. And John Earle of Kent granted it unto King Ed∣ward the third, and King Richard the second, unto John of Gaunt Duke of Lanca∣ster. Beyond this river Eske, the land for certaine miles together is accounted Eng∣lish ground: attaile at So∣l m mosse. 1542. wherein Solom Mosse became very famous, by reason especially of so many of the Scottish Nobility taken there prisoners in the yeere 1543. What time as the Scottish resolute to set upon Sir Thomas Wharton, Lord warden of the English marches: so soone as they understood that their King had committed the command of the army to Oliver Sincler (whom they disdained) they conceived such in∣dignation thereat, that with their owne shame and losse, breaking their ar∣raies in tumultuous manner, they made a generall confusion of all: which the English beholding from the higher ground, forthwith charged violently upon them, and put them to flight: many they took prisoners, who flinging away their weapons, yeelded themselves, after some few souldiers on both sides slaine, into the hands of the Eng∣lish, and of the borderers. Presently whereupon James the fifth, King of Scots was so disjected, that weary of his life he died for very sorrow. The land thereabout is cal∣led Batable ground, Batable ground. as one would say, Litigious ; because the English and the Scottish have litigiously contended about it. For the inhabitants on both sides, as borderers in all other parts, are a military kind of men, nimble, wily, alwaies in readines for any service, Leven. yea and by reason of often skirmishes, passing well experienced. Leven, the o∣ther river whereof I spake, springing in the limit just of both kingdomes, runneth by no memorable place, unlesse it be Beucastle (as they commonly call it) a Castle of the Kings, which standing in a wild and solitary country, hath beene defended onely by a ward of souldiers. But this in publicke records is written Bueth-castle, so that the name may seeme to have come from that Bueth, who about King Henry the first his dayes, after a sort ruled all in this tract. Certaine it is that in the reigne of Edward the third it was the patrimony of Sir John of Strivelin a Baron, who married the daughter and one of the heires of Adam of Swinborne. In the Church, now much de∣caied, there is layed for a grave-stone this old inscription, translated thither from some other place. LEG. II. AUG. FECIT. In the Church-yard there is erected a Crosse about 20. foot high, all of one en∣tire foure square stone, very artificially cut and engraven, but the letters are so worn and gone, that they cannot be read. But whereas the Crosse is chequy, in that manner as the shield of Armes belonging to the family of Vaulx, sometime Lords in this tract, we may well thinke that it was erected by them. More into the South, and farther within the country lyeth the Barony of Gilles∣land ; a little region so encombred, by reason of sudden rising brookes, which they call Gilles, that I would have deemed it tooke the name of them, had I not read in a booke, belonging to the Abbey of Lanercost, that one Gill Fitz-Bueth, who is called also Gilbert in a Charter of King Henry the second, held it as Lord in old time, of whom it is probable this name was rather given to it. Through this Gillesland, the wall of Severus, that most famous monument of all Britaine, runneth streight, as it were by a line, Scalby Castle. from Carlile Eastward, by Stanwicks, a little village; by Scalby castle, belonging in times past to the Tilliols (sometimes a name in this tract of good wor∣ship and reputation) from whom it came to the Pickerings ; then Cambec, a small brooke runneth under the wall: Neere unto which the Barons of Dacre built Asker∣ton castle, Askerton. a little pile, where the Governour of Gillesland, whom they call Land-Ser∣geant, had a ward. Beneath the wall it conjoyneth it selfe with the river Irthing, where standeth Irthington a chiefe Manour, as they tearme it, of this Barony of Gil∣lesland : And great ruins are here to be seen at Castle-steed. Neere unto it, is Bramp∣ton a little mercate towne, Brampton. Brementura∣cum. which we suppose to bee BREMETURACUM, at the very line and range of the wall, for it is scarce a mile from the said wall: where in times past, lay the first Band of the Tungri out of Germanie in the declining state of the Romane Empire, and a company of Armaturae, under the generall of Britaine. These were horsemen armed at all peeces. But whether these Armatures were Duplar or Simplar, Armaturae Ve∣get. l. 2. c. 7. it is doubtfull. Duplar or Duple Armaturae they were called in those daies, who had double allowances of corne: Simplar, that had but single. Neither verily must I overpasse in silence, that hard by Brampton, there mounteth up an high hill, for∣tified in the verie top with a trench; they call it the Mote : from which there is a faire prospect every way into the country. Beneath this, and by Castle-steeds, like as at Trederman joining unto it, were found these inscriptions, exemplified for me by the hand of the right honourable Lord William Howard of Naworth, third sonne unto Thomas late Duke of Norfolke, a singular lover of venerable antiquitie, and learned withall, who in these parts in right of his wife, a sister and one of the heires of the last Lord Dacre, enjoieth faire possessions. This stone also was found there in an old Hot-house: wherein by ill fortune the name of the Emperours Lievtenant, and Propretour of Britaine is worne out. Neere to Brampton, Gelt a riveret runneth downe, by the banke whereof in a crag called Helbecke, are read these antiquities (wherein the words hang not well to∣gether) erected, as it seemeth, by a Lievtenant of the second Legion Augusta, under Agricola the Propraetour: and others beside, which the injurie of time hath envi∣ed us. Perhaps Pro∣praetore. In the same rocke these words also are read, written in a more moderne and newer letter. OFFICIUM ROMANORUM. This Gelt emptieth himselfe into the river Irthing, which with a swift and angry streame holdeth his course by Naworth Castle, belonging unto the Lord William Howard aforesaid, who now repaireth it: but lately to the Barons of Dacre, of whom when the last died in his tender yeeres, Leonard Dacre his Unkle, who chose rather to try the title of inheritance with his Prince by force of armes, than with his Nieces by wager of law, seized into his hands this Castle, and levied a band of rebels a∣gainst his Prince: whom the Lord of Hunsdon, with the garrison souldiers of Berwick soone discomfited and put to flight: in which conflict many were slaine, but more ranne away, amongst whom Leonard himselfe escaped. But of him more in my Annales. Neerer unto the wall beyond the river Irthing, was lately found this faire votive altar, erected to the Goddesse Nymphe of the Brigantes, for the health of the Empresse Plautilla, wife to M. Aurelius Antoninus Severus, and the whole Imperiall family, by M. Cocceius Nigrinus a Treasurer to the Emperour, when Laetus was se∣cond time Consull, with intricate connexion of letters, which I read thus. DEAE NYMPHAE BRIGantum QUOD VOVERAT PRO SALUTE PLAUTILIAE COnjugis INVICTAE DO Mini NOSTRI INVICTI IMP. M. AURE Lii SEVERI ANTONINI PII. FE Licis C AE Saris AU Gusti TOTIUSQUEDO MUS DIVINAE EJUS M. COCCEIUS NIGRINUS Questor AU Gusti Numini DEVOTUS LIBENS SUSCEPTUM Solvit LAETO II.— In the yeere of Christ 216. Here by was the Priory of Lanercost, founded by R. de Vaulx, Lord of Gillesland: and hard by the wall Burd Oswald. Beneath which, where that Picts wall passed over the river Irthing by an arched bridge, was the station of the first band Aelia Dacica, or of the Dacians (the place is now named Willoford ) which the booke of Notice of Provinces, and many altars bearing inscriptions to Iupiter Optimus Maximus, reared by that Cohort here, doe plentifully prove: Of which I thought good to adde these unto the rest, although time hath almost worne them out. Iovi optimo Maximo. I. O. M. COH. I. AEL. DAC. CUI PRAE IG I. O. M. OH. I. AEL. DA C.—C.—A. GETA IRELSAVRNES — I. O. M. CoH. I. AEL. DAC. C. P. STATU LoN GINUS, TRIB. PRO SALUTE D. N MAXjMIANO Fortissimo Caesari. FOR—CAE VA— OAED LEG. VI VIC.P.F. F. I. O. M. COHIAEL. DAC TETRICIANORO —C. P. LUTIC —V S. DESIG NATUS TRIB. I.O.M. COH. I. AEL. DAC. GORD. ANA. C.P —EST I. O. M. —H. I. AEL. DAC. —C.PRAEE SI.— —FLIUS FA —S TRIB.— —PETUO.— —COS. Lords of Gil∣lesland. Out of an old Missal. Also R. Cook Clarenceux calleth him Ra∣dulph .i. Raulph. So doth Manu∣script bookes of Fountaines and Holme. The first Lord of Gillesland, that hitherto I have read of, was William Mes∣chines, the brother of Ralph Lord of Cumberland (I meane not that William bro∣ther to Ranulph Earle of Chester, from whom came Ranulph de Ruelent, but the brother of Ralph) yet could hee never wrest it wholly out of the Scots hands: for Gill, the sonne of Bueth held the greatest part of it by force and armes. After his death, King Henry the second gave it to Hubert de Vaulx, or de Vallibus, whose shield of Armes was Chequy Or & Gueles. His sonne Robert founded and endowed the Priory of Lanercost. But the inheritance after a few yeeres was by marriage translated to the Moltons, and from them by a daughter to Ranulph Lord Dacre, whose line hath flourished unto our daies in very great honour. Having now in some sort surveied the maritime coasts, and more inward parts of Cumberland; the side that lieth more Easterly, being leane, hungry, and a wast, remaineth to bee viewed: and yet it sheweth nothing but the spring-head of South-Tine in a moorish place, and an ancient Romane high-way eight ells broad, paved with great stone (commonly called Mayden Way ) which leadeth out of Westmorland ; Maiden way. and where the riveret Alon, and the aforesaid South Tine meet together in one channell, by the side of an hill of gentle descent, there remaine yet the footings of a very great and ancient towne: which was toward the North enclosed within a fourefold rampier, and Westward, with one and an halfe: the name of the place is now Whiteley Castle: and for to testifie the antiquity thereof, there remaineth this imperfect inscription, with letters inserted one in another, after a short and compendious manner of writing, whereby wee learne that the third Cohort of the Nervians erected there a Temple unto the Emperour Antonine, sonne of Severus. IMP. CAES. Lucii Septimi Severi Ara∣BICI, ADIABENICI, PARTHICI, MAX. FIL. DIVI ANTONINI Pii Germanici SARMA. NEP. DIVIANTONINI PII PRON. DIVI HADRIANI ABN. DIVI TRAIANI PARTH. ET DIVI NERVAE ADNEPOTI. M. AURELIO ANTONINO PIO FEL. AUG. GERMANICO PONT. MAX. TR. POT—X—IMP.—COS. IIII. P. p.— PRO PIETATE AEDE—VOTO— COMMUNI CURANTE— —LEGATO AUG. PR—COH. III. NERVIO— RVM—G.R.POS. Whereas therefore the third Cohort of the Nervii served in this place, which Cohort the booke of Notices in a latter time placeth at ALIONE, Alone. or as Antonine nameth it ALONE, and the little river running underneath is named Alne : if I should thinke this were ALONE, it might seeme rather probable than true, considering the injury of devouring time, and the fury of enemies have long agoe outworne these matters out of all remembrance. Albeit when the State of the Romane Empire decaied most in Britain, this country had been most grievously harried and spoiled by the Scots and Picts, yet it preserved and kept long the ancient and naturall inhabitants the Britans, and late it was ere it be∣came subject to the English Saxons. But when againe the English Saxons state, sore shaken by Danish warres, Kings of Cumberland. ran to ruine, it had peculiar Governors, called Kings of Cumberland, unto the yeere of our Lord 946. at what time, as the Florilegus. Floure-gatherer of Westminster saith, King Edmund, by the helpe of Leoline Prince of South-wales, wa∣sted and spoiled all Cumberland, and having put out the eyes of both the sonnes of Dun∣mail King of the same Province, hee granted that kingdome unto Malcolme King of Scots, to be holden of him, that he might defend the North parts of England by land and sea from the inrodes and invasions of the common enemies. Captaines or Rulers of Cumberland. Whereupon the eldest sons of the Kings of Scotland were for a while under the English Saxons, and Danes both, called the Prefects, or Deputy Rulers of Cumberland. But when England had yeelded it selfe into the hands of the Normans, this part also became subject unto them; and fell unto the lot of Ralph de Meschines, whose eldest sonne Ranulph, was Lord of Cumberland, and partly in his mothers right, and partly by his Princes favour together, Earle also of Chester. But King Stephen, to purchase favour with the Scots, restored it unto them againe, that they should hold it of him and the Kings of England. Howbeit K. Henry the second, who succeeded after him, per∣ceiving that this over great liberality of Stephen was prejudiciall both to himself and his realme, demanded againe of the Scot Northumberland, Cumberland, and West∣morland: And the K. of Scots ( as Newbrigensis writeth) wisely considering that the King of England had in those parts both the better right and also greater power, although he might have pretended the oath, which he was said to have made unto his grandfather Da∣vid, what time hee was knighted by him: yet restored he the foresaid marches, according to his demand, fully and wholly, and received of him againe the Earledome of Hunting∣don, which by ancient right appertained to him. Earles of Cumberland: As for Earles of Cumberland, there were none before the time of King Henry the eighth, who created Henry Lord Clifford (who derived his pedigree from the Lords Vipont ) the first Earle of Cumberland: who of Margaret, the daughter of Henry Per∣cy Earle of Northumberland, begat Henry the second Earle: hee by his first wife, daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, had issue Margaret Countesse of Der∣by ; and by a second wife, the daughter of Lord Dacre of Gillesland, two sonnes, George and Francis: George the third Earle, renowned for sea-service, armed with an able body to endure travaile, and a valorous minde to undertake dangers, died in the yeere 1605. leaving one onely daughter, the Lady Anne, now Countesse of Dorset. But his brother, Sir Francis Clifford, succeeded in the Earledome; a man whose ardent and honorable affection to vertue, is answerable in all points to his ho∣nourable parentage. As for the Wardens of the West-marches against Scotland in this County, which were Noblemen of especiall trust, I need to say nothing, when as by the union of both kingdomes under one head, that office is now determined. This shire reckoneth beside chappels, 58. Parish Churches. VALLUM, SIVE MURUS PICTICUS: That is, THE PICTS VVALL▪ T Hrough the high part of Cumberland shooteth that most fa∣mous Wall (in no case to be passed over in silence) the limit of the Roman Province, Frontier senses or Forts, wri∣ters termed Clusurae, be∣cause they ex∣cluded the ene∣mies; and Prae∣tenturae, be∣cause they were set against or affront the ene∣mies. the Barbarian Rampier, the Forefence and Enclosure, for so the ancient writers termed it, being called in Dion , that is, a crosse Wall; in Herodian, , that is, a Trench or Fosse cast up; by Antonine, Cassiodore, and o∣thers, VALLUM, that is, the Rampier; by Bede, MURUS, that is, the Wall; by the Britans, Gual-Sever, Gal-Sever, Bal, Val, and Mur-Sever ; by the Scottish, Scottishwaith ; by the English, and those that dwell thereabout, See P. Pithoeus in adversariis lib. 1. cap. 14. the Picts Wall, or the Pehits Wall, the Keepe Wall, and simply by way of excellencie, The Wall. When the ambitious and valiant Romans, The Limits or Bounds of the Empire. finding by the guidance of God and as∣sistance of vertue, their successe in all their affaires above their wishes, had enlarged their Empire every way, so as that the very unwealdinesse thereof began now to be of it selfe fearefully suspected; their Emperours thought it their best and safest policie to limit and containe the same within certaine bounds: for in wisedome they saw, That in all greatnesse there ought to be a meane, like as the heaven in selfe reacheth not beyond the limited compasse, and the seas are tossed to and fro within their owne pre∣cincts. Now those limits or bounds, according to the natures of the places, were ei∣ther naturall, as the sea, greater rivers, mountaines, wasts and desart grounds; or arti∣ficiall, as frontier-fenses, namely trenches or dikes, castles, keeps or fortresses, wards, mounds, and baricadoes by trees cut downe and plashed, bankes, rampiers and walls: along which were planted garrisons of souldiers against the barbarous nations confi∣ning. Whence it is that we read thus in the Novellae of Theodosius the Emperour, Tit. 43. Whatsoever lieth included within the power and regiment of the Romans, is by the appoint∣ment and dispose of our Ancestors defended from the incursions of Barbarians with the rampier of a Limit. Vallo Limitis. Along these limits or borders souldiers lay garrisoned in time of peace within frontier-castles and cities: but when there was any feare of waste and spoile from bordering nations, Hence come Stationes A∣gartae in Ve∣getius. some of them had their field-stations within the Bar∣barian ground, for defence of the lands: others made out-rodes into the enemies mar∣ches, to discover how the enemies stirred; yea, and if good occasion were offered, to encounter with them before they came to the Limits. In this Iland the Romans, The first fore∣fense. when they perceived that the farther parts of Britaine lying North were cold, and a rough barren soile, and inhabited by the Caledonian Britans and barbarous nations, in subduing whereof they were sure to take much paines, and reape very small profit, built at sundry times divers fore-fenses, as well to bound, as to defend the Province. Bodo ia and Glotta. The first of these seemeth to have beene made by Iulius Agricola, when he fortified with holds and garrisons that narrow space of ground that lieth betweene Edenborrough Frith and Dunbretten Frith, which after∣wards was eftsoones strengthened. When TERMINUS the god of bounds, S. Austin. de Civ. Dei, l. 4. c. 19. who would not give place to Jupiter him∣selfe, was so enforced to yeeld to Hadrian the Emperour, that he withdrew the Limit of the Roman Empire in the East to the river Euphrates, The second fore-fense. whether for envie to Trajans glorie, under whom the Empire extended furthest, or for feare; he likewise withdrew the limits fourescore miles, or thereabout, within this Iland, to the river Tine, and there made the second fore-fence. He, saith Spartianus, brought a wall on for foure∣score miles in length (which should divide the Barbarians and the Romans asunder) raised with great stakes or piles pitched deep in the ground, and fastned together in maner of a murall or military mound for defence, as may be gathered out of that which followeth in Spartianus. And this is that fore-fense wherewith we are now in hand: for it go∣eth out in length Lxxx. Italian miles. About which were PONS AELIUS, CLASSIS AELIA, COHORS AELIA, ALA SABINIANA, which tooke their names from Aelius Hadrianus and Sabina his wife. And that Scottish Historiographer who wrote The wheele of Times, Rota tempo∣rum. writeth thus, Hadrian was the first of all that made a rampier or wall of a huge and wonderfull bignesse, like unto a mountaine, all of turfes digged out of the ground, with a ditch lying to it afront from the mouth of Tine unto the river Eske, that is, from the German Sea unto the Irish Ocean ; which Hector Boetius accordingly wit∣nesseth in the same words. The third Fense. Lollius Urbicus, Lievtenant of Britain under the Emperour Antoninus Pius, by his fortunate fights did enlarge the bounds againe as farre as to that first frontier fense that was made by Iulius Agricola, and even there raised up a third fense with a wall. He, saith Capitolinus, vanquished the Britans, and having driven out the Barbarians, made another wall of turfes beyond that of Hadrianus. The honour of which war hap∣pily dispatched and finished in Britain, Fronto, as the Panegyricall Orator saith, ascri∣bed unto Antonine the Emperour, and hath testified that he, although sitting still at home in the very Palace of Rome, had given charge and commission to another Generall for the war, yet like unto the Pilot of a Galley sitting at the sterne, and guiding the helme, deserved the glorie of the whole voiage and expedition. But that this Wall of Antoninus Pius, and of his Lievtenant Lollius Urbicus, was in Scotland, shalbe proved hereafter. The fourth Fense. When the Caledonian Britans, whiles Commodus was Emperor, had broken through this wall, Severus, neglecting that farre and huge big Countrey, made a fortification crosse over the Iland from Solway Frith to Tinmouth, in that very place (if I have any judgement) where Hadrian made his wall of stakes and piles: and of mine opinion is Hector Boetius: Severus, saith he, commanded Hadrians wall to be repaired with Bul∣warks of stone and Turrets, placed in such convenient distance, as that the sound of a trum∣pet, though against the wind, might be heard from the one unto the other. And in another place, Our Chronicles report, that the wall begun by Hadrian was finished by Severus. Also Hierom Surita, a most learned Spaniard, who writeth, That the Fense of Hadrian was extended farther by Sept. Severus with great fortifications, by the name of Vallum. Semblably, Guidus Paucirolus, who affirmeth, that Severus did but re-edifie and re∣paire the wall of Hadrian being falne downe. He, saith Spartianus, fensed Britain (which is one of the chiefe acts recorded in his time) by erecting up a wall overthwart the Iland, to the bound of the Ocean on both sides the Ile: whereupon he got the title of BRITANNI∣CUS. After he had driven out the enemies, as saith Aurelius Victor, he fensed Britaine so far forth as it was commodious unto him, &c. As also Spartianus: Againe Eutropius, To the end that he might for ifie with all safety and security the Provinces which he had recovered, he made a wall for 35. or rather more truely, 80. miles in length, even from sea to sea: That part of the Iland which he had recovered, as Orosius writeth, he thought good to sever from other untamed Nations by a rampier or wall: and therefore he cast a great ditch, and raised a most strong wall, fortified with many turrets for the space of an hundred and twenty two miles, from sea to sea: with whom Bede agreeth, who will not willingly heare that Severus made a wall; for that he laboureth to prove that a wall is made of stone, and a rampier, named Vallum, of stakes or piles that be called Valli, and of turfes (whereas in very truth Vallum and Murus, Murus. Vallum. that is, a wall, be indifferent∣ly used on for another.) And yet Spartianus called it Murus, that is a wall, and should seeme to shew that he made both a wall and a trench, by these words, Post murum a∣pud vallum in Britannia missum, &c. Howbeit, we gather out of Bede, that the said Vallum or Rampier was no∣thing else but a wall of turfes: and no man can truely say that the wall of Severus was built of stone. Lib. 1. c 5. But have here the very words of Bede himselfe: Severus having gotten the victorie in civill wars at home, which had fallen out to be very dangerous, was drawne into Britain upon generall revolt almost of all the allies there. Where, after great and sore battells many times fought, when he had regain'd part of the Iland, he thought good to have the same divided from other wild and untamed nations, not with a wall, as some thinke, but with a rampier: for a wall is made of stones, but a rampier whereby Camps are fortified to repell the force of enemies, is made of turfes cut out of the earth round about, but raised high in maner of a wall above ground; so that there be a ditch or trench afront it, whereout the turfes were gotten, upon which are pitched piles of very strong timber. And so Severus cast a great ditch, and raised a most strong rampier, streng∣thened with many turrets thereupon, from sea to sea. Neither is it knowne by any other name in Antonine, or the Notice of Provinces, than by Vallum, that is, a Rampier, and is in the British tongue termed Gual-Sever. Hereto we may annexe the authoritie also of Ethelward our ancientest writer next unto Bede ; who, as touching Severus, hath these words, He did cast a ditch or trench crosse over the Iland, from sea to sea; within it also he built a wall with turrets and bulwarkes. Which afterwards he calleth Fossam Severiam, that is, Severs fosse or ditch: like as we read in the most ancient Annales of the English-Saxons, , that is, Se∣verus foregirded and fenced Britain with a ditch from sea to sea. And other later wri∣ters in this wise, , that is, Severus in Britain made and finished a wall of turfes, or a rampier from sea to sea. Wil∣liam of Malmesburie likewise nameth it a famous and most notorious trench. In which very place, two hundred yeeres after, or much thereabout, a wall of stone was set up, whereof I am to speake anon. Whereas Eutropius hath set downe the length of it to be 35. miles, Victor 32. and other Authors 132. I suppose some faults have crept into the numbers. For the Iland is not so broad in that place, although a man should take the measure of the wall as it stood winding in and out, rising also and falling here and there. Nay, if one should reduce it into Italian miles, he should find little above fourescore, as Spartianus hath truely reckoned them. Some few yeeres after, this Munition, as it seemes, was forlet. Howbeit, Why lands were given to the Captaines of the Marches. when Alexander Severus the Emperour, as we read in Lampridius, had once given unto the Captaines and souldiers of the marches, those grounds and lands which were won from the enemies, so that they should be their proprietie, if their heires served as souldiers, and that they should never returne to any private men; supposing they would goe to the wars more willingly, and take the better care, if they should defend their owne pecu∣liar possessions. Note these words well I pray you: for hence may be deduced ei∣ther a kind of Feudum, or the beginning of Feuds. After this the Romans marching beyond the wall, and building themselves stations within the out-land and barbarian soile, fortifying also and furnishing them accordingly, enlarged the limits of the Ro∣man Empire againe as farre as to Edenborough Frith. Neverthelesse, the savage and barbarous people, never ceasing to assaile them upon advantages, drave them backe now and then as farre as to Severus Trench. Dioclesian the Emperour had a provident eye to these limits, under whom when as the whole command in Britaine was committed unto Carausius, for that he was re∣puted the fitter man to warre against these warlike nations, he did set up againe the fore-fense betweene Dunbritton Frith and Edenborough Frith, as I will shew in place convenient. The first that ever had blame for neglecting these limits was Constan∣tine the Great: for thus writeth Zosimus, Whereas the Roman Empire by the provi∣dence of Dioclesian was in the utmost marches thereof every where surely fensed with Townes, Castles, and Burghs, and all their military companies made their abode in them, it was impossible for the barbarous nations to passe in, but they were so met withall at eve∣ry turne by forces there set to repell them backe. Constantine abolishing this munition of Garrisons, placed the greater part of the souldiers, whom hee had removed from out of the marches, in townes that had no need of Garrisons and defence. So hee left the marches open to the inrodes of barbarous nations, without garrisons, and pestered the Cities that were at peace and quiet with a sort of souldiers, whereby most of them are now already become desolate, and the souldiers themselves, addicted to Theatricall sports and pleasures, grew by his meanes deboshed. To conclude, and simply to speake in one word, he it was that gave the first cause and beginning that the state of the Empire run∣neth to wrecke and ruine. Marcellinus lib. 38. About the yeere 367. The Countrey that lay betweene these enclosures or fore-fenses, Teodosius father unto Theodosius the Emperour recovered: he re-edified and repaired the Cities, strengthened the garrison castles and the limits with such watch, and ward, and forti∣cations, yea and when he had recovered the Province, restored it to the ancient e∣state, in such wise, as that it had a lawfull Governour by it selfe, and was afterward in honour of Valentinian the Emperour called VALENTIA. Theodosius also his sonne, having now by his own vertue attained unto the Imperiall Majestie, had a provident care of these limits, and gave commandement that the M gister Of∣f ciorum. Master of the Offices should yeere by yeer give advice and advertisement unto the Emperour how all things went with the souldiers, and in what sort the charge of castles, holds, and fore-fenses was performed. But when the Roman Empire began once to decay apparently, and the Picts, together with the Scots, breaking through the wall of Turfes by Edenborrow-frith, cruelly wasted and over-ranne these parts, the Roman legion sent to aid the Bri∣tans under the leading of Gallio of Ravenna, after they had driven away and quite removed the Barbarians, being now called backe againe for the defence of France, exhorted the Britans (these be the very words of Gildas and Bede ) to make a wall over∣thwart the Iland between the two seas, The wall be∣tweene Eden∣borrow Frith and Dunbrit∣ on Frith. which might serve for a defence to keep off the ene∣mies, and so returned home with great triumph. But the Ilanders fall to building of a wall as they were willed, not so much with stone as with turfes, considering they had no work∣man to bring up so great a piece of work, and so they did set up one good for nothing. Which, as Gildas saith, being made by the rude and unskilfull common multitude, without any one to give direction, not so much of stone as of turfe, served them in no stead. As touching the place where this wall was made, Bede proceedeth to write in this maner: They rai∣sed it betweene the two friths or armes of the sea, for the space of many miles, that where the fense of water failed, there by the help of a rampier they might defend the borders from the invasion of enemies. And such a fore-fense, reaching a great length, secured Assyria from the inrodes of forraine nations, as Ammianus Marcellinus writeth. And the Seres at this day, as we read in Osorius, fortifie their vales and plaine champion with walls, that they might thereby shelter and defend themselves from the violent incursions of the Scythians. Of which worke there made (saith Bede ) that is to say, of a most broad and high rampier, a man may see the expresse and certaine remaines to this day: which beginneth almost two miles from a Monastery called Abercurving, Eastward, at a place named in the Picts language Penvahel, in the English tongue Penveltun, and reaching Westward, endeth neere the Citie Alcluid. But the former enemies no sooner per∣ceived that the Roman souldiers were returned, but presently sailing thither by water, breake through the bounds into the marches, kill and slay all before them, and whatever stood in their way, they went downe with it under foot, they over-trample it, as if it had bin standing corne ready for harvest. Whereupon Embassadours were dispatched againe to Rome, making piteous moan, and with teares craving aide, that their miserable countrey might not utterly be destroyed, nor the name of a Roman Province, which had so long time flourished among them, waxe contemptible, being now overwhelmed with the outrage of strange nations. About the yeere of Christ 420. Hereupon a Legion was sent over, which being arrived unlooked for to∣ward Winter, made great slaughter of the enemies: as for the rest that were able to shift away and escape, they drave beyond the seas, who before time made it a practice every yeere, while no souldiers made head against them, to passe over the said seas, and raise booties. Now by this time the Romans were retired backe unto the Wall or Ram∣pier of Severus, Alciatus cal∣leth it the Bre∣viary of Theo∣dosius. and Perlineam Valli (as the booke of Notices termeth it, which was written toward the later end of Theodosius the younger his reigne) that is on both sides as well within as without the wall, they kept a standing watch and ward in their severall Stations appointed, Souldiers pla∣ced in garisons, and along the Wall. namely five wings of Horsemen with their Cap∣taines, 15. Cohorts of footmen with their Colonels, one band, and likewise one squadron; which I have mentioned and will againe in due place. As touching the time immediatly ensuing, Bede goeth forward to relate in these words. Then the Ro∣mans denounced unto the Britans, that they could endure no longer to be out-toyled and wearied with such painfull voiages and expeditions for defence of them, advising them to take weapon in hand themselves, and endevour to fight with the enemy, who could not by any meanes be stronger than themselves, unlesse they would give way to idlenesse, and become feeble therewith: Moreover, the Romans, because they thought this also might serve their allies in some stead, whom they were forced to leave, placed a wall of strong stone from sea to sea, directly betweene the Cities, which had beene built there for feare of the enemies (where Severus also in times past had made a rampire.) Here will I also put downe the words of Gildas, from whom Bede borrowed all this. The Romans di∣rectly levell a wall after their usuall maner of building, not like unto the other, at the com∣mon and private charges, adjoining unto them the poore & miserable naturall home born inhabitants, from sea to sea betwixt the cities, which chanced to have beene placed there for feare of the enemies. And now heare what Bede saith againe: Which wall, that hath beene hitherto famous and conspicuous, they with publicke and private cost, having with them the Britans helping hand also, built eight foot broad and twelve foot high, in a di∣rect line from East forward to West, as is evident even at this day to the beholders. Out of which words of Bede you may see that a great learned man, whiles he thinketh to hit the bird in the eye, hath missed the marke, straining and striving mightily to prove against Boetius and other Scottish writers, that Severus his wall of turfe was in Scotland. Doth not Bede write in plaine tearmes, after hee had spoken of the Earth-wall at Abercuruing in Scotland, that a wall was reared of strong stone where Severus had made his of turfe? and where I pray is that wall of stone but in this place, betweene Tine-mouth and Solwey frith? where was then that wall of Seve∣rus? As for the wall, there are yet such expresse tokens of it in this place, that you may tracke it as it were all the way it went: and in the In Vastis. The Wasts, Wasts, as they tearme them, I my selfe have beheld with my owne eyes on either side, huge peeces thereof stan∣ding for a great way together, only wanting their battlements. Verily I have eene the tract of it over the high pitches and steepe descents of hills, wonderfully rising and falling: and where the fields lye more plaine and open, a broad and deepe ditch without, just before it, which now in many places is groun∣ded up: and within a banke or military high-way, but in most places interrupted. It had many towres or fortresses, about a mile distant from another, which they call Castle-steeds ; and more within little fensed townes, tearmed in these dayes Chesters, the plots or ground workes whereof are to be seene in some places foure square: al∣so turrets standing betweene these, wherein souldiers being placed might discover the enemies, and be ready to set upon them: wherein also the Areani might have their Stations, whom the foresaid Theodosius, after they were convicted of falshood, displaced and removed from their Stations. Areani, certain discoverers, lib. 28. These Areani (as Marcellinus saith) were a kinde of men ordained in old time, whose office it was to runne a great way too and fro from place to place, to intimate or give intelligence unto our Leaders what stirre and noise there was abroad among the neighbour nations. So that the first founders of this wall may seeme to have beene directed by his counsell, who wrote unto Theodosius and his sonnes as touching military affaires in this manner. Among the commodities of State and Weale publike, right behovefull is the care concerning the limits, which in all places doe guard and enclose the sides of the Empire: The defence whereof may bee best assured by certain castles built neare together, so that they be erected with a steedy wall & strong towres a mile asunder one from another: Which munitions verily the Land-lords ought to arreare without the publicke charge, by a distribution of that care among them∣selves, for to keep watch and ward in them and in the field forefences, that the peace and quiet of the Provinces being guarded round about therewith, as with a girdle of defence, may rest safe and secure from hurt and harme. The dwellers hereabout talke much of a brasen trunke (whereof they found pee∣ces now and then) that set and fitted in the wall artificially, ranne betweene every Fortresse and Towre, so as that if any one in what towre soever, conveyed the watchword into it, the sound would have beene carried straightwaies without any stay to the next, then to the third, and so to them all one after another, and all to sig∣nifie at what place the assault of the enemy was feared. The like miraculous device of the Towres in Bizantium, Xiphiline relateth out of Dion in the life of Severus. But since the wall now lies along, and no pipe remaineth there, many tenants hold farmes and lands of our Kings here round about in Cornage, Cornage. as our Lawyers speake: that is, that they should give knowledge unto their neighbours of the enemies approaching, by winding of an horne: which some thinke, had the first originall from an ancient custome of the Romans: who also were bound to goe by the Kings precept in the army and service for Scotland (these be the words of the Record) as they marched forth in the Vantward, as they returned home in the Rereward. But that I may follow the tract of this wall more directly in particular, it begin∣neth at the Irish sea, hard by BLATUM BULGIUM or Bulnesse, and goeth on along the side of Solway frith, and so by Burgh upon Sands unto LUGU-VALLUM or Carlile, where it passeth over Eden. From thence it runneth forth, and hath the river Irthing beneath it, crossing over Camberke, a little brooke running crooked with many tur∣nings in and out, where are great tokens to be seene of a fortification. After this ha∣ving cut over the rivers Irthing and Poltrosse, it entreth into Northumberland, and among the mountaines hudled together, goeth along by the side of the river which they call South-Tine without any interruption (save only that it is divided by North-Tine, where in ancient time there was a bridge over it) as farre as to the German O∣cean: as I will shew in due place when I am come once into Northumberland. Yet this admirable worke could not avert and keepe out the tempestuous stormes of forraine enemies: But when the Romane armies were retired out of Britaine, the Picts and Scots assaulting the wall upon the sudden with their engines and hooked weapons, pluckt and puld downe the garrison souldiers, brake through the fence, and overranne Britaine far and neere, being then disarmed and shaken with civill broiles, and most miserably afflicted with extreme famine. But the most wofull and lamen∣table misery of these heavie times, Gildas a Britan, who lived not long after, pensil∣leth out lively in these words. As the Romans were returning homeward, there appear striving who could come first out of their Caroches, The high-land Sco s at this day call their little barges Carroches. in which they had passed over the vale The Paris e∣dition hath Scytica Val∣lem, and mea∣neth haply the Scottish sea. Stitica, like unto duskish swarmes of wormes, comming forth of their little caves, with most narrow holes at noone day in summer, and when the heat of he sunne is at the highest, a rabble of Scots and Picts, in maners partly different, but in one and the same greedy designe of bloodshed: And having knowledge once that our friends and associates were re∣tired home, and had denied ever to returne again, they with greater confidence and bold∣nesse than before time attempt to possesse themselves of all the North side, and the utmost part of the land from out of the Inlanders hands, as far as to the very wall. Against these invasions there stands placed on high in a Keepe, a lasie crew, unable to fight, unfit (God he knowes) for service, trembling and quaking at the heart, which night and day sate still as benummed, and stirred not abroad. Mean while the hooked engines of their naked and bareshanked enemies cease not, wherewith the most miserable inhabitants were plucked downe from the walls, and dashed against the hard ground. This good yet did such an un∣timely death unto those that thus lost their lives, that by so quicke a dispatch and end, they were freed from the view of most piteous paines and imminent afflictions of their brethren and children. What should I say more? when they had left the Cities and high wall, they were againe driven to flye and hide themselves; and being thus dispersed, in more despe∣rate case they were than they had been before. The enemies likewise presse still sorer upon them, and semblably hasten bloody carnage and slaughters one in the necke of another. And even as lambs are torn in pieces by butchers, so are these lamentable inhabitants by the enemies; insomuch as their abode and continuance together might be well compared to wild beasts. For both they preyed one upon another, and by robbing also forbare not the short pittance of food that the poorer sort of the inhabitants had for their owne small sustentation: & also these outward calamities were encreased with domesticall commoti∣ons, so that by reason of so great robbing, pilling, and spoiling, the whole countrey wanted the stay of all kind of food, save onely that which they got by hunting, to comfort their poor pining bodies. But this is worth the observation, The policy and wisdome of the Roman in setting of this wall. that as by the wisdome of the Romans this wall was so built, that it had two very great rivers neere to it on the inner side (as it were) for another defence, namely, Tine and Irthing, that are divided one from the other with a very narrow parcell of ground: So on the other side the barbarous people were so cunning, that in the same place especially they made their first entrance be∣twixt these rivers, where they might have free passage farther into the heart of the Province, without hinderance of any river: according as we will shew by and by in Northumberland. The fabulous tales of the common people concerning this wall, I doe wittingly and willingly overpasse. Yet this one thing, which I was enformed of by men of good credit, I will not conceale from the Reader. There continueth a set∣led perswasion among a great part of the people thereabout, and the same received by tradition, Plants medici¦nable and wholsome. That the Roman souldiers of the marches did plant here every where in old time for their use certaine medicinable hearbs, for to cure wounds: whence it is that some Emperick practitioners of Chirurgery in Scotland, flock hither every yeere in the beginning of summer, to gather such Simples and wound-herbes; the vertue whereof they highly commend as found by long experience, and to be of sin∣gular efficacy. OTTADINI. A Fter the Brigantes, Ptolomee placeth those who (accor∣ding to the divers readings in Copies) are called OTTA∣LINI, OTTADENI, and OTTADINI: In steed of all which names, I would, if I durst presume so far, with a very easie alteration substitute OTTATI∣NI, that it might signifie, On the farther side of, or above the river Tine. And so verily would the name of the Inhabitants bee consonant with the position and site of the countrey. For these are planted beyond Tine. And the Welsh-Britans at this day call a country in Wales beyond the river Conwey, Uch Conwey: beyond the hils, Uchmynith: beyond the wood, Uch-Coed : beyond the river Gwyrway, Uch-Gwyrway. Neither can it be, I assure you, altogether absurd, if after the same manner they tearmed this country beyond Tine, Uch Tin: whence the Romans may seeme to have framed this name OTTADINI, by a word somewhat dis∣jointed, but more smooth and pleasanter to the eare. And whereas Xiphilinus reporteth out of Dio, that all the Britans that dwelt neere unto the wall, which we spake of even now, MAEATAE. were called , or MAEATAE, good reason it is that we should thinke these our Ottadini dwelling by the said wall, were among those Maeatae, who in that memorable revolt and rebellion of the Bri∣tans, called in the Caledonians to assist them, and take armes with them. At which time Severus the Emperour commanded his souldiers peremptorily to kill all the Britans, using these verses of Homer. Let none scape cruell death, Nor dint of sword: no not the child unborne In mothers womb that lies: his death is sworne. But the tempestuous storme of this rebellion was calmed by the death of Severus, who in his very preparation for warre died at Yorke. Long after, Valentia. this Countrey seemeth to have beene a part of VALENTIA. For so Theodosius called it in honour of Valentinian the Emperour, after he had subdued the barbarous people, and recovered this tract or Province, which be∣fore had beene lost. But these ancient names were quite worne out of use in the English Saxon war, and all the Countries lying North on the other side of the Arme of the sea called Humber, began by a Saxon name to bee called , that is, The Kingdome of Northumberland: which name notwithstanding being now cleane gone in the rest of the Shires, remaineth still, as it were, surviving in Northumberland onely. Which when that state or kingdome stood, was knowne to bee a part of the Kingdome of Bernicia, which had peculiar petty Kings, and reached from the River TEES to Eden∣borough Frith. NORTH-HUMBER-LAND. N Orth-umber-land, which the English Saxons called , lieth after a sort enclosed in fashion of a Triangle, but not with equall sides. The South side is shut in with Derwent running into Tine, and with Tine it selfe, where it butteth upon the Bisho∣prick of Durham. The East side the German sea lieth and beateth upon it. But the West side, which reacheth out from South-west to North-east, is first parted from Cumber-land, afterward with Cheviot and hills linked one to another, and lastly with the river Twede it affronteth Scotland, and so was the limit of both kingdomes: over which were set in this countie two Go∣vernours, the one called L. Warden of the middle Marches, Wardens of the Marches. the other of the East marches. The ground it selfe for the most part rough, and hard to be manured, see∣meth to have hardened the inhabitants, whom the Scots their neighbours also made more fierce and hardie, while sometimes they keep them exercised in warres, and o∣ther whiles in time of peace intermingle their manners among them, so that by these meanes they are a most warlike nation, Rank-riders. and excellent good light-horsemen. And whereas they addicted themselves as it were wholly to Mars and Armes, there is not a man amongst them of the better sort, Very many Baronies in Northumber∣land. that hath not his little tower or pile: and so it was divided into a number of Baronies, the Lords whereof in times past, before King Edward the first his dayes, went commonly under the name Barons, al∣though some of them were of no great living. But a wise and politicke device this was of our Ancestours, to cherish and maintaine martiall prowesse among them in the marches of the kingdome, if it were nothing else but with an honourable bare title. Howbeit this title came to nothing among them, what time as under King Ed∣ward the first, those onely began to enjoy the name and honour of Barons, whom the Kings summoned unto the high Court of Parliament by speciall summons. To∣ward the sea and Tine, by diligence and good husbandrie it becommeth very fruit∣full; but elsewhere it is more barraine, rough, and as it were unmanurable: And in many places those stones Lithanthraces, Sea-coales. which we call Sea-coales, are digged up in great plentie, to the great gaine of the inhabitants, and commoditie of others. The hithermore part bending toward the South-west, Hexam-shire. and called Hexam-shire, ac∣knowledged a long time the Archbishop of Yorke for the Lord thereof, and chal∣lenged unto it selfe, by what right I know not, the priviledge of a Countie Palatine. But after it became of late annexed unto the crowne land, upon an exchange made with Robert the Archbishop, by authority of Parliament it was laied unto the coun∣tie of Northumberland, that it should be subject to the same jurisdiction, and in all causes have recourse unto the high Sheriffe thereof. South Tine (a river so called, The river South-Tine. if wee may beleeve our Britans, for that by reason of his narrow bankes hee is straight pent in, for so signifieth Tin, as they say, in the Bri∣tish tongue) having his spring head in Cumberland, neere unto Alsten-more, where there was an ancient copper mine, holding on his course by Lambley, sometime a Nun∣nerie built by the Lucies, and now with floods for the most part undermined and fal∣len downe: also by Fetherston-Haugh, the seat of the ancient and well descended fa∣mily of Fetherston, when hee is come as farre as Bellister Castle, turning Eastward, runneth directly forward with the WALL, which is in no place three miles distant from it toward the North. For the Wall having left Cumberland behind it, and crossed over the Irthing, pas∣sed likewise with an arch over the swift riveret Poltrosse, where I saw within the wall high mounts of earth cast up, as it were to over look and discover the country. Neer this standeth Thirl-wale Castle, which is not great, but strongly built; yet it gave both habitation and surname to the ancient and noble family, which was first called Wade: where the Picts and Scottish made their passage into the Province, between Irthing and Tine (and that verily upon good forecast) in that place where they had free entrance by reason of no river in their way, Joh. Fordon. into the inmore parts of England. But you shall better understand this, and the name of the place, out of John Fordon the Scottish Historian, whose words it will not bee amisse, as I thinke, to set downe here, because the booke is not everie where to bee had. The Scots (saith hee) when by conquest they had gotten the possession of those countries, Scoto-Chroni∣con. which are on this side the wall, toward Scotland, began to inhabite them, and having of a suddaine raised a sort of the Country people, with their mattockes, pickaxes, rakes, three tined forkes and spades, make wide gappes, and a number of holes in it, by which breaches they might passe in & out rea∣dily at their pleasure. Of those holes therefore this mound of the wall afterward took the name Thirlwall, which it hath at this day in this place: for in the English tongue that very place is called Thirlwall, which is as much as a wall pierced through. Then saw we Blenkensop, which gave name unto a generous family, as also their habitation in a right pleasant country Southward; which was part of the Baronie of Sir Nicholas of Bolteby, a Baron of renowne in the time of King Edward the first. Ca r Vorran. When you are past Thirlwall, the said wall openeth it selfe unto the raging river Tippall, where in the descent of an hill, a little within the wall, is to bee seene the ground worke of a Castle of the Romans, in forme foure square, everie side whereof taketh an hundred and fortie paces. The verie foundations likewise of houses, and trackes of streets still appeare most evidently to the beholders. The Ranke-riders, or taking men of the borders doe report, that a great port-way, paved with flint and bigge stone, led from hence through wastes unto Maiden castle in Stanemore. Cer∣tes, it passed directly to Kirkby Thor, whereof I spake. A poore old woman that dwelt in a little poore cottage hard by, shewed unto us an ancient little altar-stone, in testimonie of some vow, with this inscription unto VITIRINEUS, a tutelar God, as it seemed, of the place. DEO VITI RINE— —LIMEO ROV Posuit libens merito. P. L. M. This place is now named Caer Vorran ; what it was in old time it passeth my wit to find out, seeing that amongst all the stations mentioned along the range of the Wall, there is not one commeth neere to it in name; neither have wee any light out of inscriptions to lead us thereunto. What ever it was, sure the wall thereby was both strongest and highest by farre: for scarce a furlong or two from hence, upon a good high hill, there remaineth as yet some of it to be seene fifteen foot high, and nine foot thicke, built on both sides with foure square ashler stone, although Bede reporteth it was not above twelve foot in heighth. From hence the wall goeth forward more aslope by Iuerton, Forsten, and Chester in the Wall, neere to Busie-Gap, a place infamous for theeving and robbing: where stood some Castles, Chesters they call them, as I have heard (but I could not with safetie take the full survey of it, for the ranke-robbers thereabout.) As for Chester, the neighbours told us that it was a very great building, so that we may well think it to have been that second station of the Dalmatians, which is called in the old booke of Notice, MAGNA, where this inscriptions was found upon an ancient altar. PRO SALUTE DESIDIENI AE —LIANI PRAE ET SUA. S. POSUIT VOT —AO SOLVIT LIBE NS. TUSCO ET BAS SO COSS. Anno Christ. 259. This broken and imperfect altar likewise brought from thence, wee read at Mel∣krig, where now women beat their buckes on it. DEAE SURI These two in∣scriptions are yet to be seene in Sir Robert Cottons house at Conning∣ton. AE SUB CALP UR NIO AG— ICOLA. LEG. AUG PR. PR. A. LICINIUS —LEMENS PRAEF —III. A. IOR— — Which if I were able to read, The goddesse Suria. thus would I willingly read it, and the draught of the letters maketh well for it. Deae Suriae, sub Calphurnio Agricola Legato Augusti, Propraetore Licinius Clemens Praefectus ; that is, Unto the goddesse Suria, under Calphur∣nius Agricola Lievtenant of Augustus, Capitolinus. Some will have her to be Juno, others Venus. and Propraetor, Licinius Clemens the Captaine. This Calphurnius Agricola was sent by Antoninus Philosophus against the Britans, what time as there was likely to be warre in Britain, about the yeere of Christ 170. At which time some Cohort under his command erected this Altar unto THE GOD∣DESSE SURIA, whom with a turreted crown on her head, and a Tabber in her hand, was set in a coach drawn with Lions, as Lucian sheweth at large in his Narra∣tion of the goddesse Suria. Suetonius in Nero. cap. 56. Which goddesse also Nero, albeit he contemned all religi∣on, especially worshipped for a time; and soone after so aviled and despised, that he defiled her with his urine. From hence wee saw Willy otes-wicke, the seat of a respected family of the Rid∣leyes ; and hard by it the river Alon, Alon River. tunning with a surging streame and rise of waters into Tine, namely, when both the Alons are met together in one channell. By the Easterne of the two Alons, there is to bee seene a towne, now called Old-towne, but what the old name was, will not easily be found. Now to the wall againe. The next station upon the wall beyond Busie-gap, Seaven-shale. is called Seaven-shale: the name whereof, if any man would thinke with mee to come from the wing Saviniana or Sabiniana, I might the more confidently say that it was that HUNNUM where the Notice of Provinces reporteth the wing Sabiniana kept watch and ward. Then beyond Carraw and Walton, stands Walwick, which some conjecturally would have to be GALLANA in Antonine: Gallana. in all which places there be evident remaines of old fortifications. North-Tine. Here there runneth through the wall North Tine, which being now come downe amaine out of the mountaines in the marches of England and Scotland, first as hee passeth Eastward, Tin-dale. watereth Tindale, a place taking the name of him, and in the end receiving into his bosome the river Rhead, which springing out of Readsquire, a steep mountaine, True plane. where oftentimes was the True-place, that is, a place of parley and con∣ference for the East marches (for the LL. Wardens of the East marches to both Kingdomes were wont here to decide matters and controversies betweene the bor∣derers) giveth his owne name to a dale, too too voide of inhabitants by reason of de∣predations. Rhedesdale. Both these dales breed notable light horse-men: and both of them have their hils hard by, so boggy and standing with water in the top, that no horsemen are a∣ble to ride through them: whereupon (and that is wonderfull) there be many very great heapes of stone, Lawes. called Lawes, which the neighbour inhabitants be verily per∣swaded were in old time cast up and layd together, in remembrance of some there slaine. In both of them also there bee many ruinous remaines of old Castles. In Tindale are Whitchester, Delaley, Tarset, sometimes belonging to the Comins. In Rheadsdale are Rochester, Green-chester, Rutchester, and some others, whose ancient names are abolished and lost by the injury of long time. But seeing that at Roche∣ster which standeth neerer into the head of Rhead, in the brow of a rocky high moun∣taine, that overlooketh the countrey underneath a great way (whence it seemeth to have taken this new name) there hath beene found an antique altar among the rub∣bish of an old castle, with this inscription, D. R. S. i. Duplares Numeri explo∣ratorum Bre∣menii Aram instituerunt Numini cjus Caepione Chari∣tino Tribuno votum solve∣runt libentèr meritò. DVPL. N. EXPLOR. BREMEN. ARAM. INSITVERVNT N EIVS C CAEP CHARITINO TRIB VSLM. May wee not hence ghesse that BREMENIUM, for which there hath beene made so long and great search, was here, whereof Ptolomee hath made mention in this very si e and position of the country, and from which Antonine the Emperor begin∣neth the first journey of Britaine, as from the utmost limit of the Romane Province in Britaine at that time? And the limits or bounds of a Dominion were seas, great ri∣vers, Mountaines, Desert lands, and unpassable, such as be in this tract. Trenches al∣so with their rampires, walls, mounds of trees cut downe or plashed, and Castles especially built in places more suspected and dangerous than others: to all which there are to bee seene remaines here every where about. Certes, when the Barba∣rous nations, after they had broken through the wall of Antoninus Pius in Scotland, harried all over the countrey, and laid all wast before them, and the wall of Hadrian lay neglected unto the time of Severus, wee may well thinke that even here was set downe the limit of the Romane Empire: and that from hence the old Itinerary which goes about under the name of Antoninus began thus, A limite, that is, From the Bound. As for that which is set to it, id est, A vallo, that is, From the wall or ram∣pier, may seeme a glosse put downe by the transcribers, considering that BREMENI∣UM is foureteene miles Northward distant from the said wall: unlesse it may seeme to have been one of those out Field-stations, which, as I said even now, were placed within the Barbarians ground, beyond the Wall. Scarce five miles from old BREMENIUM Southward, standeth Otterburne, where there was a field most valiantly fought betweene the Scottish and English; in which the victory waved alternatively too and fro three or foure times, and fell in the end to the Scottish. For Sir Henry Percy, for his overforward spirit and youthfull heat by-named Hot-Spurre, who had the leading of the English, lost 15. hundred of his men in fight, and was himselfe led away prisoner: William Douglas also the leader of the Scots, with most of his company was slaine, so that the martiall valour of both nations was never more illustrious. There is also another towne beneath of ancient memory, which Rhead watereth, or rather hath now well neare washed away: they call it at this day Risingham, which is in the ancient English and German language, The Giants Habitation, as Ri∣singberg in Germany, the Giants Hill. Many shewes are there, and those right evi∣dent of antiquity. The inhabitants report that God Magon defended and made good this place a great while against a certaine Soldan, that is, an Heathenish Prince. Nei∣ther is this altogether a vaine tale. For that such a God was here honoured and wor∣shipped, is plainly proved by these two altar stones lately drawne out of the river there, with these Inscriptions. Deo Mogon∣ti Cadenorum & numini Do∣mini nostri Augusti M.G. Secundinus Be∣neficiarius Con∣sulis, Habitanci Primas tam pro se & suis posu∣it. DEO MOGONTI CAD. ET. N. DN. AUG. M. G. SECUNDINUS BF. COS. HA ITA NCI PRIMAS TA— PRO SE ET SUIS POSUIT DEO MOUNO CAD. INVENTUS DO V. S. Out of the former of these, Primas. wee may in some sort gather that the name of the place was HABITANCUM: and that he who erected it was Either pro∣moted to that place by him, or by a dispen∣sation exempt from souldiers services. Beneficiarius to a Con∣sull, and Primate beside of the place. For certaine it is out of Codex Theodosii, that the chiefe Magistrates of Cities, Townes, and Castles, were called Primates. Now whether this God were the tutelar and appropriate Genius of the Gadeni, whom Ptolomee placed as next neighbours to the Ottadini, I cannot averre, let others sift and search it out. Moreover, these inscriptions also were here found: for which with others, we are to thanke the right worshipfull Sir Robert Cotton of Connington Knight, who very lately both saw them, copied them out, and most kindly imparted them to this worke. D. M. BLESCIVS DIOVICVS FILIAE SVAE VIXSIT AN. I. ET DIES XXI. — CUIPRAEEST. M. PEREGRINIUS SUPER TRIB. COH. I. VANG FECIT CURANTE JUL. PAULO TRIB. DEAETER TIANAESA CRUM AEL. TIMOTHEA — P. V. S. LL. M. HERCU LIJUL. PAULLUS TRIB. V. S. VR. ANTONI NI. PII AVG. M MESSORIVS DILIGENS TRI▪ BVN VS SACRVM. DEO. INVICTO HERCVLI. SACR L. AEML. SALVANVS TRB. COH. IVANGI V. S. P. M. Cohors prima Vangionum. Vetusta e con∣labsum. And that which farre surmounteth all the rest for curious workmanship, a long ta∣ble in this forme artificially engraven, set up by the fourth Cohort of the Gauls-Horsmen, and dedicated to the sacred Majestie of the Emperours. But now leaving these particularities, Rhead a little lower carrieth both his owne streame, and also other swelling brookes, that hee receiveth unto him by the way into Tine, and so farre reacheth Rhedesdale. Which as we find in a book of the Kings Exchequer, Testa Nevilli. the Umfran Vills held of ancient feofament by regall power and service, that they should keep the vale from theeves and robbers. Here every way round about, in the In Vastis. Nomades. Wasts as they tearme them, as also in Gil∣lesland, you may see as it were the ancient Nomades, a martiall kinde of men, who from the moneth of April unto August, lye out scattering and summering (as they tearme it) with their cattell, Sheales and Shealings, Clipches. in little cottages here and there, which they call Sheales and Shealings. Then North-Tine aforesaid passing downe by Chipches, a towre be∣longing sometime to the Umfranvills, afterward to the Herons, and not farre from Swinborne a little Castle or Pile, which gave name unto a worthy family, and was in old time parcell of the Baronie of the Hairuns, now commonly called Heron, a war∣like generation, now a seat of the Wodering tons ; and so commeth to the Wall, running under it beneath Collerford, where a bridge of arches was made over, and where now are seen the ruins of a large castle. Cilurnum. Scilcester. Hoveden. Which if it were not CILURNUM, where∣in the second wing of the Astures lay in garrison, it was hard by at Scilicester in the wall: where, after that Sigga a noble-man had treacherously murdred Ethwald King of North-Humberland, there was a Church built by the faithfull Christians in ho∣nour of Saint Cuthbert and King Ofwald ; whose name so obscured the light of the o∣ther, that the old name being quite gone, St. Oswald. it is now called Saint Oswalds. This Os∣wald King of Northumberland, Cedwella, or Caswallo. being at the point to give battaile unto Cedwall the Britan (for so Bede calleth him, whom the Britans themselves named Caswallon ) King, as it seemeth, of Cumberland, erected a Crosse, and humbly upon his knees prayed unto Christ, that he would vouchsafe his heavenly aide unto his devoted ser∣vants: and presently with a loud voice cried unto the army in his wise: Bedel. 2. c. 2. About the yeere 634. Christian reli∣gion first be∣gan in Nor∣thumberland. Let us all kneele downe, and beseech the Almightie, living, and true God, of his mercie to defend us from our proud and cruell enemie. No signe (saith Bede ) doe we finde of Christian faith, no Church, no altar throughout the whole nation to have bin erected, before that this new leader & conducter of an armie, directed thereto by faithfull devotion, did set up this sign of the holy Crosse, when he was to fight against a most savage & bloodie enemie. For when Oswald perceived in this battell the present assistance of Christ, which he had so ear∣nestly implored, streightwaies he bacame a professed Christian, and sent for Aidan the Scot, to catechise and instruct his people in the Christian religion. The very place of victorie was called , Heafonfield, now Haledon. that is, Heaven-field ; which at this day in the same sense, as some will have it, is named Haledon. Concerning which have here these ver∣ses, such as they be, out of the life of the said Oswald. Tune primum scivit causam cur nomen haberet Heafenfeld, hoc est, caelestis campus, & illi Nomen ab antiquo dedit appellatio gentis Praeteritae, tanquam belli praesaga futuri. Nominis & caussam mox assignavit ibidem Caelitùs expugnans caelestis turba scelestam. Neve senectutis ignavia possit honorem Tam celebris delere loci, tantíque triumphi, Ecclesiae fratres Hangustaldensis adesse Devoti, Christúmque solent celebrare quotannis. Quoque loci persistat honos in honore beati Oswaldi Regis, ibi construxêre capellam. Then wist he first, and not before, why this place tooke the name Of Heafenfield, that is, the field of Heaven; for the same By those that liv'd in alder time unto it given had beene, As if by skill divine they had this future warre fore-seene. And even the reason of this name he there streightwaies expressed, For that from heaven an heavenly troupe, a wicked crew suppressed. Now that in time through negligence the same might not miscarry Both of the place so memorable, and this so noble victory, The Monkes of Hangustald-Church in great devoutnesse here, Are wont to be, and Christ to praise duely from yeere to yeere. And that the honour of this place might still remaine entire, In honour of Saint Oswald King, they built a Chappell there. And another in praise of him wrote in that unlearned age, not unlearnedly, thus. Quis fuit Alcides? quis Caesar Iulius? aut quis Magnus Alexander? Alcides se superasse Fertur. Alexander mundum, sed Iulius hostem: Se simul Oswaldus, & mundum vicit, & hostem. What was to Oswald Hercules? What Iulius Caesar? what Great Alexander? Hercules is named much for that Himselfe he won: Xander the world: Iulius made foes to flye, Oswald at once conquer'd himselfe, the world, and enemy. Beneath Saint Oswalds both Tines meet in one, after that South-Tine (which kee∣peth just pace in parallel, as it were, with the wall, about two miles from it) hath pas∣sed by Langley Castle, where sometimes, under King John, Sir Adam de Tindale had his Barony, which afterwards came to Sir Nicolas Bolteby, and of late belonged to the Percies: and at Aidon runneth under the woodden weake bridge, and shaking through the violence of the streame Tine, by this time being now broader and broa∣der, continueth his course in one channell apace toward the Ocean, by Hexham, Hexham. which Bede calleth Hangustald, but the old English-Saxon . That this was named in the Romans time AXLELODUNUM (where the first Cohort of the Spaniards had their station) both the name implieth, Axelodunum. & the high situation upon an hill answerable to the name, Dunum. when as the ancient Britans called an hill Dunum. But as touching this, heare what Richard Prior of this place saith, who flourished 500. yeeres agoe. Not farre from the river Tine Southward there standeth a towne, now in these dayes verily but of meane bignesse, and slenderly inhabited, but in times past, as the remaines of antiquity do beare witnesse, very large and stately. This place, of the little ri∣ver Hextold running downe by it, and swelling otherwhiles like unto a flood, with a swift streame, is name Hextoldesham: which town Etheldreda the wife of King Egfrid gave unto Saint Wilfrid in the yeere 675. that hee should exalt it with an Episcopall See; who built there a Church, that for the artificiall frame and passing beauty went beyond all the Minsters in England. Take with you also that which William of Malmesbury wrote: This was Crown-land, when Wilfrid the Bishop exchanged with Queen Etheldreda other lands. It was wonderfull to see what buildings were erected there with mighty high walls, and how they were set out & contrived with divers turning in & out by winding staires, all polished and garnished by the curious workmanship of Masons and Pargetters, whom the hope of his liberality had allured from Rome; so that these buildings carried a shew of the Romanes stately magnificence, and stood very long struggling with time. The fore∣said King Egfrid placed an Episcopall See in this little City. But that dignity, after the eighth Bishop, vanished cleane away, whilest the Danish warres were at the hot∣test. And so ever since it was counted onely a manour or Township belonging to the Archibishops of Yorke, before the exchange made with King Henry the eighth; wherby they resigned up their right. This place was also renowned by reason of that bloudy battaile wherein John Nevill, Marquesse Montacute, encountred the leaders of the Lancastrian Faction with much courage, and with greater successe put them to flight: and therefore was created Earle of Northumberland by King Edward the fourth. But now all the glory that it hath is in that ancient Abbey, a part whereof is converted into a faire dwelling house, belonging to Sir John Foster Knight. As for the Church, it standeth whole and sound, save that the West end onely thereof is pulled downe. and I assure you a right stately and sumptuous building it is: with∣in the quire whereof is to be seene an ancient tombe of a noble-man, of that warlike family of the Umfranvils, Men buried with their legs a crosse. as appeareth by his Escutcheon of Armes, lying with his legges acrosse. After which fashion in those dayes were they onely enterred (that I may note so much by the way) who tooke upon them the crosse, and were marked with the badge of the crosse for sacred warfare, to recover the Holy land from the Ma∣hometans and Turkes. Hard by the East end also of this Church, upon the brow of an hill, are erected two most strong bulwarks of free stone, which belong, as I have heard, unto the Archbishop of Yorke. From hence we went Eastward, and came to Dilston, a mansion house of the Rat∣cliffes: In old evidence it is found written Divelstone, of a little river running into Tine, Bede lib. 3. cap. 1. which Bede called Divelesburn, where, as he writeth, Oswald having the faith of Christ for his armour and defence, in a set battaile slew Cedwalla the Britan, that wicked and horrible Tyrant, who had already slaine two Kings of Northumber∣land, and depopulated the country all over. On the other banke of Tine lieth CURIA OTTADINORUM, whereof Ptolomee maketh mention; it may seeme by the distance thereof to bee CORSTOPITUM in Antonine, called at this day of the bridg, Corbridge ; in Hovedons Annals, Corobridge ; and in Henry of Huntingdon, Cure. It can shew nothing now but a Church, and a little tower hard by, which the Vicars of the Church built, and wherein they dwell. Howbeit there remaine still sundry reliques of antique worke: Treasure in vaine. Hoveden. Tacitus. among which King John searched for ancient treasure, supposed to have beene buried there: But he was overtaken in his owne vanity, and deceived of his great expectation, no lesse than Nero, when hee searched for the hidden wealth of Dido at Carthage. For nothing found hee but stones signed with brasse, iron, and lead. But whoso shall see the heap of rubbish that lieth there∣by, and is called Colecester, Colecester. will soon say it was some hold of a Romane garrison. For∣ward still upon the same banke, wee saw Biwell a proper faire castle, which in the reigne of King John was the Barony of Sir Hugh Balliol; for which he did owe to the Ward of Newcastle upon Tine, thirty Knights [service.] Beneath this Castle there is a very goodly Weare for the catching of Salmons: and two solid piles of most firme stone, which in times past supported the bridge, stand up in the midst of the river. From hence Tine running underneath, looketh up to Prudhow Castle, in ancient bookes written Prodhow, situate very pleasantly upon the ridge of an hill. This may I ghesse to have beene PROTOLITIA, which also is called PROCOLITIA, the station of the first band of the Batavians, till time tell me more, and instruct mee better. But it is famous in this regard, that in King Henry the second his dayes it valiantly gave the check unto William King of Scots laying siege unto it; when, as William of Newborrough writeth, hee had taken great paines to no purpose, to his losse and hurt. Afterwards it belonged to the Umfranvils, men of great estimation, among whom Sir Gilbert Umfranvill flourishing in the profession of armes, in right of his wife attained the title of Earle of Anguish in Scotland, in the reign of K. Edward the first, and left that honour to his posterity. But Eleanor, daughter to the sister, and heire of the last Earle, was married at length into the family of Talebois: and afterward this castle by the Princes bountifull gift came to the Duke of Bedford. But to retire to the Wall. Beyond Saint Oswalds there are seene in the wall the foundations of two sorts, which they call Castle-steeds: then a place named Portgate, where there stood a gate in the wall, as may appeare by the word, that in both lan∣guages importeth as much. Beneath this, more within the country, is Halton-Hall : where flourisheth the family of the Carnabies, in great name for their antiquity and military prowesse: neere unto which is seated Aidon castle, sometimes part of the Barony of that Hugh Balliol before named. But for as much as many places about the wall carry this name Aidon, and the very same signifieth a Militare Wing or a troupe of horsemen, in the British tongue, of which sort there were many wings placed along the Wall (as plainely appeareth by the booke of Notices) in their sta∣tions; I would have the reader throughly to consider, whether this name was not thereupon imposed upon these places, like as Leon, upon those townes where the Le∣gions had their standing campe. Well, hard by there was digged up the fragment of an antique stone, wherein is the expresse portrait or image of a man lying in bed, leaning upon his left hand, and with the right touching his right knee, with these in∣scriptions. — NORICI. AN. XXX. —ESSOIRUS MAGNUS FRATER EJUS DUPL. ALAE SABINIANAE. M. MARI US VELLI ALONG US. A QUI SHANC POSUIT V. S. L. M. Then the river Pont, having his spring head more outwardly, and running downe neere to Fenwick-Hall, Fenwick. the dwelling house of the worthy and martiall family of the Fenwickes, for certaine miles together gardeth the wall, and upon his banke had for a defence in garison the first Cohort of the Cornavii, Pons Aelii-Pont-Eland. at a place called PONS AE∣LII, built as it seemeth by Aelius Hadrianus the Emperor, now called Pont-eland: at which King Henry the third, in the yeere 1244. concluded a peace; and neere un∣to this the first Cohort of the Tungri had their abode at Borwick, Borrovicus. Borwic. which in the Notice of Provinces is called BORCOVICUS. From Port-gate the wall runneth along to Waltowne, which, seeing the signification accordeth so well with the name, Walton. Ad-Murum. and that it standeth twelve miles from the East sea, I beleeve verily it is the same royall town which Bede called ADMURUM, wherein Segbert King of the East Saxons was by the hands of Finanus baptized and received into the Church of Christ. Neere unto this was a fortification, Vindolana. Old Winche∣ster. called Old Winchester (I would gladly take it to be that VIN∣DOLANA) which that Booke of Notice so often cited, recordeth to have beene the Frontier-station in times past of the fourth Cohort of the Gaules. And then have yee Rouchester, where we beheld very plainly the expresse footings, in form four square, of a garison Castle, that joined hard to the wall. Neere unto it Headon sheweth it selfe, which was part of the Barony of Sir Hugh de Bolebec, Barony de Bolebec. who fetched his descent by his mother from the noble Barons of Mont-Fichet ; and had issue none but daugh∣ters, matched in wedlock with Ralph Lord Greistock, I. Lovel, Huntercomb, and Corbet. Now where the wall and Tine almost meet together, New-castle upon Tine. New-Castle sheweth it selfe gloriously, the very eye of all the townes in these parts, ennobled by a notable haven, which Tine maketh, being of that depth, that it beareth very tall ships, and so defendenth them, that they can neither easily bee tossed with tempests, nor driven upon shallowes and shelves. It is situate on the rising of an hill, very un∣even, upon the North-banke of the river (which hath a passing faire bridge over it.) On the left hand whereof standeth the Castle: after that, a steepe and upright pitch of an hill riseth: on the right hand you have the Mercat place, and the better part of the City in regard of faire buildings. From whence the ascent is not easie to the upper part, which is larger by farre. It is adorned with soure Churches, and fortified with most strong walls that have eight gates in them, with many towres, what it was in old time it is not knowne. I would soone deeme it to have beene GABROSENTUM, Gabrosentum. considering that Gates-head the sub∣urbe, as it were, thereof, doth in the owne proper signification expresse that British name Gabrosentum derived from Goates, as hath been said before. The Notice also of Provinces placeth Gabrosentum and the second Cohort of the Thracians in it, with∣in the range of the wall. And most certaine it is that both the Rampier and the Wall went through this City, and at Pandon gate there remaineth, as it is thought, one of the turrets of that wall. Surely for workmanship and fashion it is different from the other. Moreover, whereas it was named before the Conquest Monk-chester, because it was as it seemeth in the possession of Monkes; this addition Chester, which signifieth a place fortified, implyeth that it was anciently a place of strength. But after the Con∣quest of the New castle, which Robert the sonne of William the Conqueror built out of the ground, it got this new name New-castle, and by little and little encreased marveilously in wealth, partly by entercourse of trafficke with the Germans, and partly by carrying out sea-coales, wherewith this country aboundeth, both into for∣raine Countries, and also into other parts of England. In the reigne of Edward the first a rich man chanced to bee haled way prisoner by the Scottish, out of the mid∣dle of the towne: who after hee had ransomed himselfe with a great summe of mo∣ney, began with all speed to fortifie the same: and the rest of the inhabitants mo∣ved by his example finished the worke, and compassed it with faire strong walls. Since which time it hath with security avoided the force and threats of the enemies and robbers, which swarmed all over the country, and withall fell to trading & mer∣chandise so freshly, that for quick commerce & wealth it became in very flourishing estate; in which regard King Richard the second granted that a sword should bee carried before the Maior, and King Henry the sixth made it a County, incorporate by it selfe. It is distant from the first Meridian or West line 21. degrees and 30. mi∣nutes, and from the Aequinoctiall line toward the North pole 34. degrees and 57. minutes. As touching the suburbs of Gateshead, which is conjoyned to New-castle with a faire bridge over the river, and appertaineth to the Bishops of Durham, I have already written. Now in regard of the site of New-castle, and the abundance of sea-cole vented thence, unto which a great part of England and the Low Countries of Germanie are beholden for their good fires, read these verses of Master John Ion∣ston, out of his Poem of the Cities of Britaine. NOVUM CASTRUM. Rupe sedens celsa, rerum aut miracula spectat Naturae, aut solers distrahit illa aliis. Sedibus aethereis quid frustra quaeritis ignem? Hunc alit, hunc terrae suscitatista sinu. Non illum torvo terras qui turbine terret; Sed qui animam terris, datque animos animis. Eliquat hic ferrum, as, hic aurum ductile fundit, Quos non auri illex conciet umbra animos? Quin (aiunt) auro permutat bruta metalla. Alchimus hunc igitur praedicat esse deum. Si deus est, ceu tu dictas divine Magister, Haec quot alit? quot alit Scotia nostra deos? NEVV-CASTLE. Seated upon high rocke shee sees dame Natures wonders strange, Or else to others wittily doth vent them for exchange. In vaine why seeke yee fire to fetch from heaven to serve your turne? The ground here either keeps it close, or quickly makes it burne. Not that which folke with stony flash or whirlewind grim affrights, But giveth life to earthly things, and mindes to living wights. This melteth iron, brasse and gold so pliable and soft: What mindes th'allective shade of gold stirres not, nor sets aloft? Nay more than so, men say it doth dull metals change to gold, To say therefore he is a God our Alchymists are bold. If God he be, as thou giv'st out (Great Master) of thy word, How many Gods then doth this place, and our Scotland afford? Scarce three miles hence (for I over passe Gosseford, Barons Sur-Teis. which was the Barony in old time of Richard Sur-Teis, who came up under King Henry the first, and lived in great honour) standeth a village named Walls-end. The very signification of the name sheweth, that this was a station of the second Cohort of Thraciens, which in the booke of Notices is called VINDOBALA, Vindobala. Vindomora. Walls end. in Antonine VINDOMORA: for it may seeme that in the provinciall language of the Britans, as the latter of them betoke∣ned The Walls-end, so the former the Rampiers-end, considering that long since they tearmed a Wall Mur, and a Rampire Bal, Val, and Gual. Neither is it credible that the Rampire or Wall reached any farther, seeing that beyond this place there are no tokens thereof: and Tine being now very neere unto the Ocean, with his exceeding deepe channell ferveth in stead of a most strong sense. Yet some there be who thinke, Tinmouth. that the rampire, and not the wall, went as farre as to the very mouth of Tine, which is called Tinmouth ; and stifly affirm that it was termed Pen-bal-crag, that is, the head of the rampire in the rocke, whom I will not contradict. But I durst almost avouch, Tunnocellum. that this was in the Romanes time TUNNOC LLUM, see∣ing that Tunnocellum soundeth as much as the Promontory of Tunn or Tine, where the first Cohort Aelia Classica, enrolled (as it is probable by the very name) by Aelius Hadrianus the Emperour, was in pay for sea service. For the Romans had certaine light Foists or Pinnaces, Naves Lufo∣riae. tearmed Lusoria, upon the rivers in the marches: as well to represse the outrodes of them that dwelt there by, as to quit them with like inrodes, as we may see in the books of Theodosius his Code, Code. under the title, de Lusoriis Danu∣bii, that is, touching The pinnaces of the river Danow. Under the Saxons Heptarchy it was called Tunna , not of Tunna the Abbot, as Bede writeth, but doubtlesse of the river; and a little Monastery it had, which was oftentimes risted by the Danes: But now it is called Tinmouth Castle, and takes great glory in a stately and strong castle, which, as an ancient writer saith, on the East and North side i unpossible to be entered, by reason of a mighty high rocke over the sea, and in other places such is the height of it, that it needs but small defence: Whereupon Robert Mowbray, Earle of Northumberland, made choice of it for his strongest hold, when hee rebelled a∣gainst King William Rufus. But, as commonly it falleth out with rebels, he had but ill successe: who being forthwith very streightly besieged, withdrew himselfe into a monastery hard by, which was counted a Sanctuary, and therefore not to bee forced and broken; neverthelesse he was drawne out thence, and kept a long time close pri∣soner in misery; a just reward for his so perfidious treachery. Now must I coast along the shore. On the back side of the Promontory, on which Tinmouth is situate, Seton. next unto Seton, which under King Henry the third was part of the Barony Dela-vall; Segedunum. Seghill. Seghill sheweth it selfe called in old time SEGEDUNUM, a sta∣tion of the third Cohort of the Lergi, by the wall or Rampire: and verily SEGEDU∣NUM in British, is all one with Seghill in English. Some few miles from hence, the shore maketh roome for the river Blith to fall into the sea: which river watering Belsey, belonging in times past to the Midletons, and Ogle, Barons Ogle. a Castle of the Barons Ogle, is here, together with the river Pont, discharged into the sea. These Ogles, from the very beginning of Edward the fourth his reigne, flourished in the dignity of Barons, enriched by marrying the heires of Sir Berthram Bothall, of Alan Heton, and of Alexander Kirkby. The issue male of these Barons went out lately, and expired in Cuthbert, the seventh Baron of that house: who begat two daugh∣ters, Joan married to Edward Talbot, a younger sonne of George Earle of Shrews∣bury; and Katharine wife to Sir Charles Cavendish Knight. Wents-beck. Barony of Mit∣ford. A little higher the river Wents-beck is swallowed up of the Ocean; it runneth be∣side Mitford, which King John and his Rutars set on fire, when in most grievous manner they over-ranne these Countries. That age called forraine and willing souldiers, Rutarii or Ruptarii. Alias de Bre∣ant. Rutars, whom Falques de Brent, and Walter Buc brought out of the Low-Countries, and from other parts, to aide King John. Brent a wilde madbraine, was at length banished out of the Realme: But Buc a more staid man, after hee had done the King stout service, had given unto him by the King possessions in Yorke∣shire and Northamptonshire: and his race flourished there, untill that John Buc was attainted under King Henry the seventh: whose great grand-son is Sir George Buc knight, a man well learned, of great reading, and Master of the Kings Revels; who (for I take pleasure to professe by whom I have profited) hath observed many things in history, and gently imparted the same to me. This was sometimes the Barony of William Berthram, whose issue male soone had an end in Roger his grand-sonne; and his three daughters inheritrices were bestowed in marriage upon Sir Norman Darcy T. Penbury, and William of Elmeley. Morpeth. From thence Wents-beck passeth through Morpeth, a famous little towne. For on the North banke of the river is the towne situate, and on the South banke standeth the Church, and the Castle by it, upon a shady hill beset with trees; which, together with the town, came from Sir Roger M rley, whose Barony it was, unto the Lords of Greistock, and so from them to the Barons Dacre of Gillesland. Nothing I have of a∣ny antiquity to say of this towne, but that in the yeere of Christ 1215. it was set on fire by the inhabitants themselves in spitefull malice to King John. From hence the river Wents-beck passeth by Bothall Castle, Histor. Mal∣rosse. and the Barony somtimes of Richard Ber∣thram, from whose posterity it was devolved unto the Barons of Ogle: Upon the bank whereof, I have thought this great while (whether truly, or upon a bare supposall I know not) that in old time GLANOVENTA stood, Glanoventa. which was fortified by the Ro∣mans with a garrison of the first Cohort of the Morini, for defence of the marches. Which the very situation doth as it were perswade; and the rivers name, together with the signification of the same, induceth me to thinke. For it is seated within the raunge of the rampire or wall, even where the booke of Notices placeth it: the ri∣vers name is Wants-beck, and GLANOVENTA in the British tongue signifieth the shore or bank of Venta. Whence also Glanon, a city in France upon the sea-shore, wher∣of Pomponius Mela hath made mention, may seeme to have drawn that appellation. Not farre hence, to let passe little piles and towres of lesse account, is to be seene neere unto the shore Withrington or Woderington, Withrington. in the English Saxon tongue of old time called an ancient Castle, which gave the name unto the Withring∣tons, Gentlemen of good birth, and Knights, whose valour in the warre hath beene from time to time remarkable. Coqu da the river. Then the river Coquet falleth into the sea, which springing among the rough and stony mountaines of Cheviot, not farre from his head, hath Billesdun upon it; from whence sprang the ancient family of the Selbies: and somewhat lower Southward, Harbottle. Harbottle, in the English Saxons tongue that is, The station of the Army, whence the family of the Harbottles descended, that in the ages aforegoing flourished. A Castle it had in times past, but in the yeere of our salvation 1314. the Scots razed it. Haliston. Close unto this standeth Halyston, as one would say Holy stone, where the report goeth, that Paulinus in the primitive Church of the English nation baptized many thousands. Warkworth. And at the verie mouth of Coquet, Warkworth a proper faire Castle of the Percies standeth and defendeth the shore, where there is a chappell wonderfully built out of a rocke hewen hollow, and wrought without beames, rafters, or anie peeces of timber. This Castle King Edward the third gave unto Henrie Percie, together with the Mannour of Rochburie. Afore time it had beene the Baronie of Roger Fitz-Richard, Rot. Parlia∣ment 5. Ed. 3. Clavering by the gift of Henrie the second King of Eng∣land, who gave also unto his sonne, Clavering in Essex, whereof at the commande∣ment of King Edward the first, they assumed unto them the surname of Clavering, leaving the ancient maner of taking their names from the forename, or Christian name of the father: for before that time they were surnamed according to the forename of the father, as Robert Fitz Roger, Roger Fitz Iohn, &c. Part of this inheritance the Nevils entred upon by Fine and Covenant, who afterward were Earles of Westmor∣land; and part of it a daughter named Eve inherited, who was wedded to Sir Th. Uf∣ford ; from whose posteritie it came hereditarily unto the Fienes Barons of Dacres. But from the younger sonnes branched the Barons of Evers, the Evers of Axholme, and the Claverings of Kalaly in this Countie, and others. Hard unto this also lieth Morwick, Morwick. which may likewise boast of the Lords it had, whose issue male had an end about the yeere of our Lord 1258. and so the inheritance passed over by the daugh∣ters unto the Lumleies, Seimors, Bulmers, and Roscells. The shore after this openeth it selfe to give passage unto the river ALAUNUS, Aulne river. which being not yet bereft of that name, whereby it was knowne unto Ptolomee, is called short Alne: Upon the bank whereof, besides Twifford, that is, A double fourd (where was holden a solemne Synod under King Egfrid) and Eslington, the habitati∣on of the Collingwoods (men renowned for their warlike exploits) there sheweth also it selfe Alan-wic, Alnewick. in the English Saxon tongue , now commonly called An∣wick, 1174. a towne ennobled by the victorie of Englishmen (wherein our ancestors shew∣ed such valour and prowesse, that they tooke William King of Scots, and presented him prisoner unto King Henrie the second) and fortified besides with a goodly ca∣stle: 1097. which when Malcome the third, King of the Scots, had by long siege enfor∣ced to such extremitie, that it was at the point now to bee yeelded up, hee was slaine by a souldier, that making semblance to deliver unto him the keyes of the Castle hanging at the head of a speare, ranne him into the bodie with it. And withall, his sonne Edward, whiles to revenge his fathers death he charged unadvisedly upon the enemie, was so wounded, that hee died thereof shortly after. This was a Baronie sometimes belonging to the Vescies. Testa Nevilli. For King Henrie the second gave it unto Eu∣stach Fitz-Iohn, father to William Vesci, to be held by the service of twelve knights. Sir John Vescy, of this race, returning out of the sacred warre in the Holy-land, was the first that brought with him into England the Friers Carmelites, Carmelites. and built for them a Covent here in Holme, a desart place, not unlike to Mount Carmel in Syria. Willi∣am, the last of the Vescies, made Antonine Bec Bishop of Durham his feofie upon trust, that he should deliver this Castle, with all the lands lying thereto, unto his base sonne, Historie of Durham. the onely childe that he left behind him; but the Bishop falsly conveied away from him the inheritance, and for readie money sold it unto William Lord Percie: since which time it hath evermore belonged to the Percies. From hence the shore making divers angles and points, Dunstaburg, Bebban. passeth by Dunstaburge, a Castle belonging to the Duchie of Lancaster, which some have untruely supposed to be Bebhan ; for Bebhane standeth higher, and in stead of is now called Bamborrow. Bamborrow. Our Bede, where hee reports that this Castle was besieged and burnt by Penda King of the Mercians, writeth that Queene Bebba gave it this name: but the Floure-gatherer recordeth, that Ida the first King of Northumberland built it, which hee sensed first with great stakes or piles of timber, and after∣ward with a wall. But take here with you the description thereof out of Ro∣ger Hoveden: Bebba (saith hee) is a most strong Citie, not verie great, but contai∣ning the space of two or three fields, having into it one hollow entrance, and the same raised on high with staires after a wonderfull manner, and on the pitch of an hill, a very faire Church, and Westward on the top thereof, there is a well set out with marvailous workmanship, sweet to drink of, and most pure to see to. But in our age it is counted a castle rather than a city, yet so bigge and large, as that it may seeme to match with a city. Male vicina. Neither went it for any other but a castle, when King William Rufus having raised over against it a tower called Mal-voisin, gave assault continually to Mowbray, while hee rebelled and lurked there, who at length privily stole away, & escaped by flight. The greatest part of the beauty ther∣of was lost long time after, in the civill warre, when Bressie the Norman, redoub∣ted souldier, who sided with the house of Lancaster, exercised his rage against it very outragiously. Since then it hath beene sore beaten with time, and the windes to∣gether, which have blowne by drifts an incredible deale of sand of the sea into the fortresses. Viscounts. Hereto adjoyneth Emildon, sometime the Barony of John Le Viscont, but Rametta the heire of that house sold away the possessions to Simon de Montfort, Earle of Leicester. Jo. Scotus the subtle Doctor flourished in the yeere 1300. In this was borne John Duns, called Scotus, because hee was de∣scended of Scotish bloud, who being brought up in Merton Colledge at Oxford, be∣came wonderfull well learned in Logicke, and in that crabbed and intricate Divini∣ty of those dayes: yet as one still doubtfull and unresolved, he did overcast the truth of religion with mists of obscurity. And with so profound and admirable subtlety, in a darke and rude stile hee wrote many workes, that hee deserved the title of the Sub∣tile Doctor: and after his owne name erected a new sect of the Scotists. But hee died pitifully, being taken with an Apoplexy, and overhastily buried for dead; whiles up∣on returne of life, nature (though too late) was about to discusse the violence of the disease, and hee, making meanes in vaine by a lamentable noise to call for helpe, after he had a long time knocked his head against the grave stone, dashed out his owne braines, and at last yeelded up his vitall breath. Whereupon a certain Italian wrote thus of him. Paul. Jovius in Elogiis Docto∣rum. Quaecunque humani fuerant, jurisque sacrati, In dubium veniunt cuncta vocante Scoto. Quid? quod & in dubium illius sit vita vocata, Morte illum simili ludificante strophâ. Quum non ante virum vitâ jugularit ademptâ, Quàm vivus tumulo conditus ille foret. All learning taught in humane books, and couch'd in holy writ, Dan Scotus darke and doubtfull made by subtlety of wit. No marvaile that to doubtfull termes of life himselfe was brought, Whiles with like wile and subtle tricke death on his body wrought. When as her stroke to kill outright she would not him vouchsafe, Untill the man (a piteous case) was buried quicke in grave. That he was borne here in England, I avouch it out of his owne manuscript works in the Library of Merton Colledge in Oxford, and upon their faithfull testimony, which conclude in this maner: Explicit Lectura, &c. that is, Thus endeth the Lecture of the subtle Doctor in the University of Paris, Iohn Duns, borne in a certaine little vil∣lage or hamlet within the Parish of Emildon, called Dunston, in the county of Northum∣berland, pertaining to the house of the scholars of Merton Hall in Oxford. On this shore forward there is nothing to be seene worth relation, but the Holy I∣sland (whereof I will write in due place) untill a man come to the mouth of Twede, which parteth England and Scotland a great way asunder, The river Twede. and is called the East li∣mit: and thereupon our Necham thus writeth, insinuating that the hither part of Scotland was called Pict-land. Anglos à Pictis sejungit limite certo Flumen, quod Tuedam pristina lingua vocat. The river Twede, a certaine bound, Divides * Pict-land from English ground. This river breaking forth at a number of Springs out of the mountaines of Scot∣land, wandereth a great while with many a crooked winding in and out, among the ranke-riders and borderers (to give them no worse tearme) whose manner is, as one saith, to try their right by the swords point. But when hee is come hard to a village called Carram, Carram. waxing a great deale bigger by reason of many waters fallen unto him, hee begins to distinguish the Confines of the Kingdomes. And when hee hath watered Werke, Werk. a Castle often assaulted by the Scottish, belonging in times past to the Rosses, and now to the Graies, who by feats of armes have wonne much honour, hee is encreased more with the streame of Till, a river that hath two names. For at the head, River Bramish. which is in the innermore part of this country, it is called Bramish, and up∣on it standeth Bramton, a little village, very obscure and almost of no reckoning: from whence it goeth Northward by Bengeley, Bramton. which together with Brampton it selfe, with Broundum, Rodam (which hath given name to a stock in this tract of good note) Edelingham, &c. was in King Henry the third his time the Barony of Patricke Earle of Dunbar: who also, as we read in the book of Inquisitions, was Inborow and Outborow betweene England and Scotland, Inborow and Outborow what they sig∣nifie. that is to say if I mistake it not, he was to allow and observe in this part, the ingresse and egresse of those that travailed too and fro betweene both Realmes. For Englishmen in ancient time called in their language an Entry, and fore Court or Gatehouse, . Higher somewhat stan∣deth Chevelingham, now called Chillingham, hard by the river, which, like as Horton not farre distant from it, had their Castles belonging to the Greies, ever since that those two families of the Greies were conjoyned in one by marriage. There lyeth neere unto it Wollover, Wollover. a Barony which King Henry the first gave to Robert De Musco Campo. Fin. 35. H. 3. Glendale. Lib. 2. cap. 14. Muschampe, who bare Azure three Butterflies or Papilions Argent: of whose race descended Robert, who in Henry the third his reigne was reputed the mightiest Baron in these North parts. But the inheritance was quickly dismem∣bred and parted among the females: one of whom was married unto the Earle of Stratherne in Scotland, a second to Sir William de Huntercombe, and a third to Odo∣nell Ford. Then the river of Glen from out of the West augmenteth Till with his wa∣ters, and nameth the vale that he runneth thorow Glendale. Touching this little river Bede writeth thus: Paulinus comming with the King and Queen into a Manour or house of the Kings, called Ad-Gebrin (at this day Yeverin) abode with them 36. daies there, emploied wholly in the catechizing and baptising: during all which time he did nothing from morning but instruct the people resorting to him in the saving word of Christ, and being thus instructed, he baptised them to the forgivenesse of their sinnes in the river of Glen, which was hard by. This house was in the time of the succeeding Kings neglected, and another made for it in a place called Melmin, Melfeld. but at this day Melfeld. Here within a little of Brum-ridge, The battaile of Brunford. by Brumeford, K. Athelstan fought a pitched field with Aulase the Dane, Constantine K. of Scots, and Eugenius or Owein Prince of Cumberland, with so fortunate successe, that this battaile was most famous farre and neere, See Henry Huntingdon. William Malmesbur. and Ingulph. yea and triumphantly described by the Historians and Poets of that time in the highest degree, with stately stile and lofty verse in the language of that age, in barbarous Latin. Here Bramish, losing his owne name, comes to bee called Till, and first saluteth Ford Castle, Fort. Etall. belonging sometimes to the warlike and valiant house of the Herons, now to the family of the Carrs: then Etall, where the family surnamed De Maneriis, or Manours sometimes inhabited, reckoned in the ranke of worshipfull Knights, out of which flourish the right honourable Earles of Rutland at this day. Many small castles and piles in this tract I wittingly let passe: For an endlesse peece of worke it were to goe through them all one by one, considering it is certaine that in King Henry the second his time there were eleven hundred and fifteene Castles in Eng∣land. Castles 1115. in England. Right over against this Ford westward, there mounteth aloft an high hill called Floddon neere Bramton, memorable in regard of James the fourth, King of Scots, who was there slaine, and his army overthrowne: who, whiles King Henry the eighth lay at the siege of Tournay in France, marched forward in great courage, and greater hope with Banner displayed against England. But Thomas Howard Earle of Surry, arraunged in good order of battaile, valiantly in this place received him: where the fight continued sharpe and hot on both parts, untill the night came upon them, uncertaine as then whether side had the victory. But the day en∣suing manifested both the Conquerour and conquered: and the King of Scots him∣selfe with many a mortall wound, was found among the heapes of dead bodies. And hereupon was granted a new augmentation unto the Armes of the Howards, as I have formerly specified. Twede having now entertained Till, runneth downe with a fuller streame by Nor∣ ham or Northam, in old time called Ubbanford, a towne belonging to the Bishops of Durham. For Egfrid the Bishop built it, and Raulph his successour erected a Castle upon the top of an high steepe rocke, and fortified it with a trench: in the ut∣more wall whereof, which is of greater circuit, are placed sundry turrets in a Can∣ton toward the river: within there is another enclosure or wall much stronger: in the midst of which there riseth up the Keepe of great heigth: But the secure peace of our age, hath now a long time neglected these fortifications, albeit they stand in the borders. Under it lieth the towne in a plaine Westward, and hath in it a Church, wherein was enterred Ceolwulph King of Northumberland, unto whom Venerable Bede dedicated his booke of the Ecclesiasticall history of England; and who afterwards renouncing the world, became a Monke in Lindiffarn Church, and served as a Christian souldier for the Kingdome of heaven, and his body was conveyed after that into the Church of Norham. Also when the Danes harried and spoiled the Holy Iland, where Saint Cuthbert, whom Bede so highly extolleth, both sate as Bishop, and lay buried: and some went about by a devout and religious kind of stealth, to transport his body over; William Malmesbury lib. 1. de Gestis Pontificum In printed books corrupt∣ly ye read Bubbeford. by occasion that the winds were against them, They laid the sacred body downe with due honour at Ubbanford, (whether it were an Episcopall See or no, it is uncer∣taine) hard by the river Twede, and there it lay for many yeeres together, untill the com∣ming of K. Etheldred. Of this, and of other things, I had information (for I will never conceale by whom I have found any good) by George Carleton borne here, as who was the Castellanes sonne of this place; whom for that I have loved in regard of his singular knowledge in Divinity (which hee professeth) and in other more delight∣full literature, and am loved againe of him, I were not worthy I assure you of love, if I did not acknowledge thus much. Beneath Norham, at Killey a little village hard by, were found, as I have heard old men say, in our grandfathers remembrance, the ornaments or Harnish of a Knights belt, and the hilt of a sword of massie gold, which were presented unto Thomas Ruthall then Bishop of Durham. A little lower appeareth the Mouth of Twede ; upon the farther side whereof stan∣deth Berwicke, the utmost towne in England, and the strongest hold in all Britaine. Which name some derive from one Berengarius a Duke, Ingulph ex∣poundeth Ber∣wicke a Ma∣nour. whom they never heard of, unlesse it were in a dreame. Leland fetcheth it from Aber, which in the British tongue signifieth the mouth of a river, so that Aberwic should sound as much as The towne by the rivers mouth. But he that knowes what Berwic in the Charters of our Kings sig∣nifieth, wherein nothing is more common than these words, I give C. and D. that is, such and such townes, cum suis Berwicis, surely he must needs understand the true Ety∣mologie of this Berwicke. For mine owne part I cannot conjecture what it mean∣eth, unlesse it be a Village or Hamlet annexed, as it were a parcell of the Demesne, unto some place of greater reckoning. For in the donations of Edward the Confes∣sour, Totthill is called the Berwicke of Westminster, and Wandlesworth the Berwicke of Patricseie, and a hundred such. But to what end is all this? Surely we doe but lose this labour, if, as some will have it, the name thereof were in old time , in the English Saxon tongue, that is, The towne or village of the Bernicians. Now that these countries were named Bernicia, it is better knowne than can bee said, and I have already notified as much. But whence soever it hath the name, it is so si∣tuate that it shooteth farre into the sea, in so much as it is well neere compassed a∣bout with the sea, and Twede together; and seated betwixt two most mighty King∣domes, as Pliny hath reported of Palmyra in Syria. It was the first thing alwayes that both nations tooke care of whensoever they were at any discord: so that since the time that King Edward the first of that name, first wrested it perforce out of the Scots hands, the Scots have oftentimes repossessed it, and the Englishmen as often recovered it from them againe. But let us here (if you please) abridge the History thereof. Of this Berwicke I have read nothing of greater antiquity than this, that William King of Scots being taken Prisoner in the field by the English, delivered it up unto our King Henry the second for his enlargement out of prison, on this con∣dition, that unlesse by a certaine day appointed hee payd a summe of money for his ransome, it should belong unto the Crowne of England for ever; and presently, as it is in the Polychronicon of Durham, the said King Henry fortified it with a Castle. Howbeit King Richard the first, upon payment of the money released it againe un∣to the Scotish. Afterwards King John, as we read in the history of Melrosse, wonne both the towne and Castle of Berwick, what time as he with his Rutars burnt Werke, Rox∣burgh, Mitford and Morpath, yea and laid all Northumberland most, because the Barons of Northumberland had done homage at Felton to Alexander King of Scots. Many yeeres after, when Iohn Balioll King of Scots had broken his oath, King Edward the first, in the yeere of salvation 1297. brought Berwick under his subjection: yet with∣in a little while after, when the fortune of warre began to smile upon the Scots, they surprised it standing for-let and neglected, but straightwayes it was yeelded up, and the English became Masters of it. Afterward, in that loose reigne of King Ed∣ward the second, Peter Spalding betraied it unto Robert Bru King of the Scots, who hotly assaulted it: and the English laid siege unto it in vaine, untill that our Hector, King Edward the third, in the yeere of Christ 1333. setting valiantly upon it, wonne it as happily. Howbeit in the reigne of Richard the second, certaine Scottish rob∣bers upon a sudden surprised the Castle: but within nine dayes Henry Pearcy Earle of Northumberland regained it. Scarce seven yeeres were overpassed, when the Scots recovered it againe, not by force but by money: For which cause, the said Henry Percy, Governour of the place, was accused of high treason: but he, with mo∣ney likewise corrupted both their faith and fortitude, and streightway got it in his hands againe. A great while after, when England was even pining by reason of civill warre, King Henry the sixth being now fled the Realme into Scotland, surrendred it up into the hands of the Scot, for to be secured of his life and safety in Scotland. But after twenty two yeeres were expired, Sir Thomas Stanley, not without losse of his men, reduced it under the command of King Edward the Fourth. Since which time, our Kings have at divers times fortified and fenced it with new works: but es∣pecially Queen Elizabeth, who of late, to the terrour of the enemy, and safeguard of her state, enclosed it about in a narrower compasse within the old wall, with an high wall of stone most strangely compacted together; which shee hath so forewarded a∣gaine with a counterscarfe, a banke round about, with mounts of earth cast up by mans hand, and open terraces above head, that either the forme of these munitions, or strength thereof may justly cut off all hope of winning it. To say nothing all this while of the valour of the garison souldiers, the store of great Ordnance and furniture of warre, which was wonderfull. He that was wont to be chiefe Governour of this towne (that I may note thus much also) was alwaies one of the wisest and most ap∣proved of the Nobility of England, and withall Warden of these East marches against Scotland. The Longitude of this towne, as our Mathematicians have observed, is 21. degrees and 43. minutes: the Latitude 55. degrees and 48. minutes. And by this in∣clination and position of the heaven, the longest day is 17. houres and 22. minutes, and the night but sixe houres and 38. minutes: so that that there was no untruth in Ser∣vi Honoratus, Britaine hath day plenty. when he wrote thus, Britanni lucis dives, &c. that is, Britain is so plen∣tifull of day light, that it affordeth scarce any time for the nights. Neither is it any mar∣vaile that souldiers without other light doe play here all night long at Dice, conside∣ring the side light that the sunne beames cast all night long: and therefore this verse of Iuvenall is true: Minimá contentos nocte Britannos. The Britaines who with least night stand content. Concerning Berwicke, have here now for an Overdeale, these verses of Master I. Ionston. Scotorum extremo sub limite, meta furoris Saxonidum: gentis par utriusque labor. Mille vices rerum, quae mille est passa ruinas, Mirum, quî potuit tot superesse malis: Quin superest, quin extremis exhausta ruinis, Funere sic crevit firmior usque suo: Oppida ut exaequet jam munitissima. Civis Militis & censum, & munia Martis obit. Postquàm servitio durisque est functa periclis, Effert laetitiae signa serena suae: Et nunc antiquo felix sejactat honore, Cum reddit Domino debita jura suo: Cujus ab auspiciis unita Britannia tandem Excelsum tollit libera in astra caput. Afront the bound of Scottish ground, where staid the furious broile Of English warres; and Nations both were put to equall toile. Now won, then lost, a thousand turnes it felt of fortunes will, After so many miseries, wonder, it standeth still. And still it stands: although laid wast it were and desolate, Yet alwaies after every fall it rose to firmer state: So that for strength best fenced townes it matcheth at this day. The Citizens were souldiers all, and serv'd in warres for pay. But after service long performed, and hard adventures past, Of joy and mirth the gladsome signes it putteth forth at last. And now her ancient honour she doth vaunt in happy plight, When to her Soveraigne Lord she yeelds all service due by right. Whose blessed Crowne united hath great Britain now at last, Whereby her head she lifts on high, since quarrels all be past. The Commen∣tary of Pim Se∣cundus, set forth in the name of Iohn Gebellin. That which Aeneas Sylvius, or Pope Pius the second, who when hee was a pri∣vate person was Embassadour into Scotland about the yeere 1448. hath reported in his owne life, by himselfe penned, and published under the name of another, touch∣ing the borderers that dwelt there round about, I thinke good here to put downe, considering that as yet they have nothing degenerated. There is a river (saith he) which spreading broad from out of an high hill, confineth both the lands: This river when Aeneas had ferried over, and turned aside into a great village about sun setting, where he supped in a country-mans house, with the Priest of the place and his hoast, many sorts of gruels and pottage, hens and geese, were set on the board, but no wine nor bread at all, and all the men & women of the village came running thither, as it were to see some strange sight: and as our countreymen are wont to wonder at Blacka-Moors, or men of Inde, so they stood gasing & gaping, as astonied at Aeneas, asking of the Priest what countreyman he was? upon what busines he came? and whether he were a Chri∣stian or no? Now Aeneas having bin enformed before what scarcity of victuals he should finde in those parts, had received at a certaine Abbey some loaves of white bread, and a rundlet of red wine: which when they had brought forth, the people made a greater won∣der than before, as who had never seen either wine or white bread. There approached un∣to the table great bellied women and their husbands, who handling the bread, & smelling to the wine, craved some part thereof, and there was no remedy but to deale and give all away among them. Now when we had sitten at s pper untill it was two houres within night, the Priest and our Hoast, together with the children and all the men, left Aeneas, and made haste away; for they said they were to flye for feare of the Scots unto a certaine pile, that stood a great way off: which Scots, at a low water when the tide was past, used to passe over the river, and fall to boot-haling. But they would in no wise take Aeneas with them, al∣though hee intreated them very instantly; no nor any woman, albeit amongst them there were many both young maids, and wives passing faire: For they are perswaded verily, that the enemies will doe them no hurt, as who reckon whoredome no hurt nor evill at all. So Aeneas remaines there alone with two servants and his Guide, in company of an hun∣dred women; who sitting round in a ring, with a good fire in the mids before them, fell to hitchell and dresse hemp, sate up all night without sleep, and had a great deale of talk with his Interpreter. When the night was far spent, what with barking of dogs, and gaggling of geese, a mighty noise and outcry was made: then all the women slipped forth divers waies, his Guide also made shift to be gone, and all was of an hurry, as if the enemies had beene come. But Aeneas thought it his best course to expect the event within his bed-chamber, (and that was a stable) for feare lest if he had runne forth of dores, knowing not the way, he should become a prey and booty to him that should first meet him. But see, streightwaies the women returned with the Interpreter, bring word all was well, and that they were friends and not enemies were come thither. There have been in this countrey certaine petty nations, Scovenburgen∣ses. Fisburgenses. called Scovenburgenses and Fisburgingi ; but to point out precisely the very place of their abode, in so great obscurity, passeth my skill: Neither can I define whether they were Danes or Eng∣lish. But Florentius of Worcester, 1013. published by the right honourable Lord William Howard, writeth, That when there was an assembly or Parliament holden at Oxenford, Sigeferth and Morcar, the worthier & mightier ministers of the Scovenburgenses, were secretly made away by Edrike Streona. Clitonem. Prince of Fis∣burgings. Also that Prince Edmund against his fathers will married Alfrith the wife of Sigefrith, and having made a journey to the Fisburgings, in∣vaded Sigeferth his land, and brought his people in subjection to him. But let others in∣quire farther into these matters. 1015. This region of North-humberland being brought under the English Saxons do∣minion by Osca Hengists brother, Kings, Dukes, and Earles of Northumber∣land. Bernicii. and by his sonne Jebusa, had first officiall gover∣nors under the fealty of the Kings of Kent. After that, when the kingdome of the Ber∣nicii, whom the Britans call Guir a Brinaich, as it were, Mountainers, was erected; that which reached from Tees to the Scottish Frith, was the best part thereof, and sub∣ject to the Kings of North-humberland: who having finished their period, whatso∣ever lay beyond Twede, became Scottish and was counted Scotland; Then Egbert King of the West-Saxons laied it to his owne kingdome, when it was yeelded up to him. Afterwards King Aelfred permitted the Danes to possesse it, whom Athelstane some few yeeres after dispossessed and drave out: yet after this the people set up Eil∣rick the Dane for their king, whom King Ealdred forthwith displaced and expelled. From which time forward this countrey had no more Kings over it, but such as go∣verned it were tearmed Earles: Amongst whom these are reckoned up in order suc∣cessively in our Histories, Osulfe, Oslake, Edulph, Walde of the elder, Uchtred, Adulph, Alred, Siward, Tostie, Edwin, Morcar, Osculph, and that right valiant Siward, who as he lived in armes, so would he dye also armed. Then his Earldome and these parts were given unto Tostie the brother of Earle Harold: but the Earldomes of Northampton and Huntingdon, with other lands of his, were assigned to the noble Earle Walde of his sonne and heire. These words of Ingulphus have I put downe, because some deny that hee was Earle of Huntingdon. And now will I adde moreover to the rest, that which I have read in an old manuscript memoriall of this matter, in the Librarie of Iohn Stow, a right honest Citizen, and diligent Antiquarie of the City of London. Copso being made Earle of Northumberland by the gift of King William Conquerour, expelled Osculph, who notwithstanding within a few daies after slew him. Then Osculph be∣ing runne through with a Javelin by a thiefe, ended his life. After this, Gospatricke purchased the Earldome of the Conquerour, who not long after deposed him from that honour; and then succeeded after him Walde of Siwards sonne. His fortune was to lose his head; and in his roome was placed Walcher Bishop of Durham, who (like as Robert Comin his successour) was slaine in a tumultuous commotion of the com∣mon people. Afterwards Robert Mowbray attained to the same honour, which hee soone lost through his owne perfidious treacherie, when he devised to deprive King William Rufus of his royall estate, and to advance Stephen Earle of Albemarle, a sonne to the Conquerors sister, thereunto. Then K. Stephen made Henrie, the sonne of Da∣vid King of Scotland (as wee read in the Poly Chronicon of Durham) Earle of Nor∣thumberland: whose sonne also William, that afterwards was King of Scots, writ himselfe, William de Warrenna Earle of Northumberland: for his mother was de∣scended out of the familie of the Earles of Warren, as appeareth out of the booke of Brinkburne Abbey. After some few yeeres, King Richard the first passed away this Earldome for a summe of money, unto Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durham for tearm of his life, scoffing that he had made a young Earle of an old Bishop. But when the said King was imprisoned by the Emperour in his returne out of the Holy-land, and Hugh for his deliverie had contributed only 2000. pounds of silver, which the King took not well at his hands, because he was deemed to have performed but a little, whom hee understood to have raised and gotten together a huge masse of money, under pretence of his ransome and release, he devested and deprived him of his Earldome. After which time the title of the Barledome of Northumberland lay discontinued about an hundred and fourescore yeeres. Percies descen∣ded from Charlemaine. But at this day the family of the Percies enjoyeth the same, which family being descended from the Earles of Brabant, inherited together with the surname of Percie the possessions also of Percie, ever since that Joscelin of Lovaine, younger sonne of Godfrey Duke of Brabant, the true issue of the Emperour Charles the Great by Gerberga, the daughter of Charles, a younger brother to Lothar, the last King of France of the line of Charles, tooke to wife Agnes the daughter and sole heire of William Percie: of which William the great grandfather William Percie, comming into England with King William the Conquerour, was rewarded by him for his service, with lands in Tatcaster, Linton, Normanby, and other places. Between this Agnes and Joscelin it was covenanted, that hee should assume the name of Per∣cies, and retaine still unto him the ancient Armes of Brabant, viz. A Lion azure (which the Brabanters afterwards changed) in a shield Or. The first Earle of North∣humberland out of this family, was Henrie Percie, begotten of Marie daughter to Henrie Earle of Lancaster, who being descended of ancient bloud, and renowned for his martiall prowesse, was rewarded also by King Edward the third with faire possessions in Scotland, created Earle of North-humberland by King Richard the se∣cond on the day of his Coronation, and much enriched by his second wife Dame Maud Lucie (although by her hee had no issue) upon a fine levied unto her, that hee should beare quarterly the Armes of the Lucies with his owne, and lived in great ho∣nour, confidence, and favour with King Richard the second. Yet full badly hee re∣quited him againe for all his singular good demerits. For in his adversitie hee for∣sooke him, and made way for Henrie the fourth to the kingdome, who made him Constable of England, and bestowed upon him the Isle of Man: against whom with∣in a while, hee feeling the corrosive and secret pricke of conscience, for that King Richard by his meanes was unjustly deposed, and besides, taking at the heart indig∣nantly, that Edmund Mortimer Earle of March, the true and undoubted heire of the Kingdome, and his neere ally, was neglected in prison, hee conceived inward enmi∣ty, grievously complaining, John Harding Manuscript. and charging him with perjury, that whereas hee had solemnly sworne to him, and others that hee would not challenge the Crowne, but onely his owne inheritance; and that King Richard should be governed during his life by the good advice of the Peeres of the realme: he to the contrary had by imprisonment and terror of death enforced him to resigne his Crown, and usurped the same, by the concurrence of his faction, horribly murthering the said K. and defrau∣ding Edmund Mortimer Earle of March of his lawfull right to the Crown, whom he had suffered to languish long in prison under Owen Glendour, reputing those traitours who with their owne money had procured his enlargement. After the publication of these complaints, he, confident in the promises of his confederates, who yet failed him, sent his brother Thomas Earle of Worcester, and his courageous sonne Henry surnamed Hot-Spurre, with a power of men against the King, who both lost their lives at the battaile of Shrewesbury. Whereupon he was proclaimed traitour, and at∣tainted; but shortly after, by a kind of connivency, received againe into the Kings fa∣vour (unto whom he was a terrour) yea and restored to all his lands and goods, save onely the Isle of Man, which the King resumed into his owne hands. Howbeit within a while after, being now become popular, and over forward to entertaine new de∣signes, and having procured the Scots to bandy and joyne with him in armes, him∣selfe in person entred with banner displayed into the field, against the King, as an U∣surper, and on a sudden at Barrhammore in a tumultuary skirmish in the yeere 1408. was discomfited and slaine by Thomas Rokesby the high Sheriffe of Yorke-shire. E∣leven yeeres after, Henry, this mans nephew by his sonne Henry Hot-Spur (whose mother was Elizabeth, daughter to Edmund Mortimer the elder, Earle of March, by Philippa the daughter of Leonel Duke of Clarence) was restored in bloud and inhe∣ritance by authority of Parliament, in the time of King Henry the fifth: which Henry Percie, whiles he stoutly maintained King Henry the sixth his part against the house of Yorke, was slaine at the battell of Saint Albans, like as his sonne Hen∣ry, the third Earle of Northumberland, who married Aelenor, the daughter of Ri∣chard Lord Poinings, Brian, and Fitz-Pain, in the same quarrell lost his life in the bat∣taile at Towton, in the yeere 1461. The house of Lancaster being now kept under, and downe the wind, and the Percies with it troden under foot, King Edward the fourth made Iohn Nevill, Lord Montacute, Earle of Northumberland: but he after a while surrendred this title into the Kings hands, and was created by him Marquesse Mon∣tacute. After this Henry Percy, the sonne of Henry Percy aforesaid, recovering the favour of King Edward the fourth, obtained restitution in bloud, and hereditaments; who in the reigne of Henry the seventh was slaine by the countrey people, that a∣bout a certaine levie of money exacted by an Act of Parliament, rose up against the Collectours and Assessours thereof. After him succeeded Henry Percy, the fifth Earle, whose sonne Henry by a daughter and Coheire of Sir Robert Spenser, and E∣leanor the daughter likewise and Coheire of Edmund Beaufort Duke of Somerset, was the sixth Earle; who (having no children, and his brother Thomas being execu∣ted for taking armes against King Henry the eighth, in the first difference about Re∣ligion) as if now that family had beene at a finall end for ever) prodigally gave away a great part of that most goodly inheritance unto the King and others. Some few yeeres after, Sir Iohn Dudley Earle of Warwick, got to himselfe the title of Duke of Northumberland, by the name of Iohn Earl of Warwick, Marshal of England, Vicount Lisle, Baron Somery, Basset, and Ties, Lord of Dudley, Great Master and Steward of the Kings house ; when as in the tender age of King Edward the sixth, the Chieftaines and leaders of the factions shared titles of honour among themselves, their fautors, and followers. This was that Duke of Northumberland, who for the time, like unto a tempestuous whirlewind, began to shake and teare the publicke peace of the state, whiles he with vast ambition plotted and practised to exclude Mary and Eliza∣beth the daughters of King Henry the eighth from their lawfull right of succession, and to set the Emperiall Crowne upon Lady Jane Grey, his daughter in law (being seconded therein by the great Lawyers, who are alwaies forward enough to humour and sooth up those that bee in highest place.) For which being attainted of high treason, he lost his head, and at his execution embraced and publikely professed Po∣pery, which long before, either seriously or colorably for his own advantage, he had renounced. When he was gone, Queene Mary restored Thomas Percy, nephew un∣to Henry the sixth Earle by his brother Thomas, unto his bloud, and by a new Pa∣tent created him first Baron Percy, and anon Earle of Northumberland, to himselfe and the heires males of his body, 3. & 4. Philip and Mary. and for default thereof, to his brother Henry, and his heires males. But this Thomas the seventh Earle, for his treason to Prince and coun∣try, under maske of restoring the Romish religion againe, lost both life and dignity in the yeere 1572. Yet through the singular favour and bounty of Queen Elizabeth, according to that Patent of Queene Mary, his brother Henry succeeded after him, as the eighth Earle; who in the yeere 1585. ended his dayes in prison, and had for his successor Henry his sonne, by Katherin the eldest daughter, and one of the heires of John Nevill, Lord Latimer, the ninth Earle of Northumberland of this family. Parishes in Northumberland about 46. SCOTLAND. SCOTIA Regnum SCOTLAND. N Ow am I come to SCOTLAND, and willingly I assure you will I enter into it, but withall light∣ly passe over it. For I remember well that said saw, In places not well knowne lesse while wee must stay: as also admonition of that Grecian, : that is, Art thou a stranger? be no medler. And verily I should play an unadvised part, if I would insist long in that, wherein I am but little con∣versant. But yet seeing Scotland also joyeth in the name of BRITAIN, let it bee lawfull for me (reserving the due honour to the Scottish) according to my purpose, having boldly undertaken to illustrate BRITAIN, to proceed with their good favour, leave, and licence, and by drawing aside in some sort the curtaine of obscure an∣tiquity, to point out with my finger, if I shall be able, some places of ancient note and memory. Certes, I assure my selfe that I shall bee easily pardoned in this point, the people themselves are so courteous and well meaning, and the happinesse of these daies so rare and admirable, since that by a divine and hea∣venly oportunity is now fallen into our laps, which we hardly ever hoped, & our Ancestors so often and so earnestly wished: namely, that Britaine, so many a∣ges dis-joined in it selfe and unsociable, should all throughout, like one uniform City, under one most sacred and happy Monarch, the founder of perpetuall peace, by a blessed Union be conjoyned in one entire body. Who being through the propitious goodnesse of Almighty God, elected, borne, and preserved to the good of both nations, as he is a Prince of singular wisdome and providence, and fatherly affected to all his subjects, doth so cut off all causes and occasions of feare, of hope, of revenge, complaint, and quarrell; that the dismall DISCORD which hath set these nations (otherwise invincible) so long at debate, might be stifled and crushed for ever; and sweet CONCORD triumph joyously with end∣lesse comfort, when (as one sometimes sung this tenour) Jam cunctigens una sumus, that is, Wee all one Nation are this day, whereunto as a Chorus both nations resound, Et simus in aevum, that is, God grant we may be so for aye. But before my pen commeth to Scotland, thus much I thinke it good to ad∣vertise the Reader aforehand, that I leave the first originall of the Scottish nation to their owne Historians: also the primitive derivation of their name to the learned among them, banishing all conjectures whatsoever of others, which either hasty credulity or carelesse negligence hath forged, as well in the late foregoing age, as in these our dayes. And according to the same order which I kept before in England, I will premise some few lines touching the division of Scotland, the States of the Kingdome, and the Tribunals or Courts of Iustice: then will I briefly touch the situations and Commodities of the soile in every severall Region: what places there be of greater fame and name, and what Families more noble and notable than the rest, have most flourished with the title and honour of Earles and Barons of the Parliament, so far forth as hitherto I could find by reading or enquiry: And that so circum∣spectly, with such an honest desire and sincere affection to truth, that I hope I shall not give offence to the malicious; and with so compendious brevity, that I will not prevent their curious diligence, who are in hand to set out these matters with a fuller pensill, and to polish the same with more lively and lasting colours. THE DIVISION OF SCOTLAND. T He North part of the Island of Britaine, was of old time inha∣bited throughout by the Picts, who were divided into two Nations, the DICALIDONII, and VECTURIONES: of whom I have spoken already out of Ammianus Marcellinus. But when the Scots became Lords and Rulers over all this part, it was shared into seven parts among seven Princes, as we finde in a little ancient pamphlet touching the division of Scotland, in these words and old name. The first part contained Enegus and Maern. The second, Atheodl and Goverin. The third, Stradeern and Meneted. The fourth was Forthever. The fift, Mar with Buchen. The sixth, Muref and Ros. The seventh Cathanes, which Mound, a mountaine in the midst divideth, running on forward from the West sea to the East. Then afterwards the same Author reporteth, according to the relation of An∣drew Bishop of Cathanes, that the whole Kingdome was divided likewise into se∣ven territories. The first from Frith, in the British tongue, called by the Romans Worid, now Scotwade, to the river Tae. The second to Hilef, according as the sea fetcheth a compasse, to a mountain in the North-east part of Strivelin, named Athran. The third from Hilef to Dee. The fourth from Dee to the river Spe. The fifth from Spe to the mountaine Brunalban. The sixth, Mures and Ros. The seventh, the kingdome Argathel, as it were the border and skirt of the Scots: who were so called of Gathelgas their Captaine. Also according to the habitation of the people, Scotland is now divided into High∣land-men and Lawland-men: Highlandmen Lawlandmen. These being more civill, use the English language and apparrell: the other, which are rude and unruly, speak Irish, and goe apparelled Irish∣like, as I have already said. Borderers. Out of this division I exclude the Borderers, because by reason of peace shining now upon them on every side, by a blessed and happy Union, they are to bee ranged and reckoned in the very heart and midst of the British Em∣pire, as who begin to be weary of wars, and to acquaint themselves with the delight∣full benefits of peace. Moreover, according to the situation and position of the places, the whole King∣dome is divided into two parts: the South, on this side the river Tay, and the North beyond Tay ; besides a number of Islands lying round about. In the South part these countries are more remarkable than the rest. Teifidale. Merch. Lauden. Liddesdale. Eskedale. Annandale. N ddesdale. Galloway. Carrick. Kyle. Cunningham. Arran. Cluydesdale. Lennox. Stirling. Fife. Strathern. Menteith. Argile. Cantire. Lorn. In the North part are reckoned these Countries. Loquabrea. Braidalbin. Perth. Athol. Anguish. Mern. Marr. Buquhan. Murray. Rosse. Sutherland. Cathanes. Strathnavern. These are subdivided againe according to their civill government, into counties, which they call Sherifdomes, Seneschalfies, commonly Stewarties, and Bailiwicks, or Bailerries. Counties, or Sheriffe∣domes. Edenburgh. Linlythquo. Selkirk. Roxburgh. Peblis. Berwick. Lanark. Renfrew. Dunfreis. Wightou. Aire. Bute. Argyle and Tarbet. Dunbarton. Perth. Clackmannan. Kinros. Fife. Kincardin. Forfaire. Aberd ne. Bamff. Elgin. Forres. Narne. Innerness. Cromartie. Orknay and Shetland. Seneschalsies or Stewarties. Menteith. Strathern. Kircudbricht. Annandale. Bailiwickes or Baileries. Kile. Carick. Cunningham. Hadingtona Constablery. Bishopricks. As touching the administration of that divine City and commonwealth, which we tearme the Church, like as the Bishops in all the world besides, had no certain di∣oeceses, before that Dionisius Bishop of Rome, about the yeere 268. did set out dioe∣ceses for Bishops: so the Bishops of Scotland executed their Episcopall functions in what place soever they came, indifferently and without distinction, untill the time of King Malcolm the third, that is, about the yeere of our redemption 1070 at which time the dioeceses were confined within their bounds and limits. Afterwards, in processe of time, this Hierarchie, or Ecclesiasticall government, was established in Scotland. Two Archbishops, one of Saint Andrews, the other of Glasco ; whereof the former is counted Primate of all Scotland: under whom there be eight Bishoprickes. Dunkeld. Aberdon. Murray. Dunblan. Brechin. Rosse. Cathanes. Orkney. Under the Archbishop of Glasco there be onely three. Whiterne. Candida Casa, or Galloway. Lismore, or Argile. The Iles. THE STATES OR DEGREES OF SCOTLAND. T He Republicke, or Commonwealth of the Scots, like as that of Englishmen, consisteth of a King, the Nobility or Gentry, and Commons. The King, that I may use the words of their owne Record, is Di∣rectus totius Dominus, that is, The direct Lord of the whole Domain, or Dominion, and hath royall authority and jurisdiction over all the States and degrees, as well Ecclesiasticall as Lay or Temporall. Next unto the King is his eldest sonne, who is called PRINCE OF SCOTLAND, and by a peculiar right Duke of Rothsay, and Seneschall or Steward of Scotland. But all the rest of the Kings children are named simply Princes. Among the Nobles, Thanes. the greatest and most honourable were in old time, The Thanes, that is, those who (if my judgement be ought) were ennobled onely by the office which they administred. For the word in the ancient English Saxon tongue signifieth, The Kings Minister. Of these, they of the superior place were called Ab∣thanes, the inferior, Under Thanes. But these names by little and little grew out of use, ever since that King Malcolm the third conferred the titles of Earles and Barons, af∣ter the manner received from the English, upon Noble men of good desert. Since when, in processe of time new titles of honours were much taken up, and Scotland as well as England, hath had Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Vicounts, and Barons. As for the title of Duke, the first that brought it into Scotland was King Robert the third, a∣bout the yeere of Salvation 1400. like as the honourable titles of Marquesse and Vi∣count were first brought in by our most gracious Soveraigne, King James the sixth. These are counted Nobles of the higher degree, and have both place and voice in the Parliaments, Knights. and by a speciall name are called Lords, like as also the Bishops. Among the Nobles of a lower degree, in the first place are ranged Knights, who verily are dubbed with greater solemnity than in any other place throughout all Europe, Lairds. by taking of an oath, and are proclaimed by the publike voice of an Herald. Of a second sort are they, who are tearmed Lairds and Barons: among whom none were reckoned in old time, but such as held immediatly from the King, lands in Chef, and had jus furcarum, that is, power to hang, &c. In the third place are all such as being descended from worshipfull houses, Gentlemen. and not honoured with any especiall dignitie, be termed Gentlemen. All the rest, as Citizens, Merchants, Artisans, &c. are reputed a∣mong the Commons. THE JUDICATORIES, OR COURTS OF JUSTICE. Parliament. T He supreme Court, as well for dignitie as authoritie, is accoun∣ted the Assembly of the States of the Kingdome, which is cal∣led by the very same name as it is in England, A Parliament: & hath the same verie power as absolute. It consisteth of three States, of Lords Spirituall, namely, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors: and of Lords Temporall, to wit, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Vi∣counts, and Barons: and Commissioners for Cities & Burghs. Unto whom were adjoined not long since for everie Countie also two Commissioners. It is appointed and solemnly called by the King at his plea∣sure, at a certain set time, before it be holden. When these States abovesaid are assem∣bled, and the causes of their assembly delivered by the King or the Chancellour, the Lords Spirituall chuse out, apart by themselves, eight of the Lords Temporall. Sembla∣bly, the Lords Temporall make choise of as many out of the Lords Spirituall: then the same all jointly together nominate 8. of the Commissioners for the counties, & as ma∣ny of the Commissioners for the free Burghs regall, which make up in all the number of 32. And then these Domini pro articulis. Lords of the Articles (so they are termed) together with the Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper of the Privie Seale, Kings Secretarie, &c. do admit or reject everie bill proposed unto the States, after they have bin first imparted unto the King. Being allowed by the whole assembly of the States, they are throughly weigh∣ed and examined, and such of them as passe by the greater number of voices, are exhi∣bited unto the King, who by touching them with his Scepter, pronounceth that hee either ratifieth and approveth them, or disableth and maketh the same voide: But if any thing disliketh the King, it is razed out before. The Second Court, or next unto the Parliament, is the Colledge of Iustice, or as they call it, The Session. The Session, which King James the fifth 1532. instituted after the forme of the Parliament of Paris, consisting of a President, 14. Senatours, seven of the Cleargie, and as many of the Laitie (unto whom was adjoined afterward the Chan∣cellor, who hath the chiefe place, and five other Senatours) three principall Scribes or Clerks, and as many Advocates as the Senatours shall thinke good. These sit and minister justice, not according to the rigour of law, but with reason and equitie, every day (save onely on the Lords day and Monday) from the first of November to the fifteenth of March; and from Trinitie Sunday unto the Calends of August. All the space betweene, as being the times of sowing and harvest, is vacation and intermissi∣on of all suites and law matters. They give judgement according to the Parliament Statutes and Municipall Lawes, and where they are defective, they have recourse to the Imperiall Civill Law. There are besides in everie Countie inferiour civill Judicatories or Courts kept, wherein the Sheriffe of the shire, or his deputie, decideth the controversies of the in∣habitants, about violent ejections, intrusions, dammages, debts, &c. From which Courts and Judges, in regard of hard and unequall dealing, or else of alliance and par∣tialitie, they appeale sometime to the Session. These Sheriffes are all for the most part hereditarie. For the Kings of Scots, like as of England also, to oblige more surely unto them the better sort of Gentlemen by their benefits and favours, made in old time these Sheriffes hereditarie and perpetuall. But the English Kings soone perceiving the inconveniences thereby ensuing, of purpose changed this order, and appointed them from yeere to yeere. There be civill Courts also in everie regalitie, holden by their Bailiffes, to whom the Kings have graciously granted royalties: as also in free Burroughs, by the Magistrates thereof. There are likewise Judicatories, which they call Commissariats, the highest whereof is kept at Edenburgh: in which before foure Judges, actions are pleaded concerning Wills and Testaments, the right of Ecclesiasticall benefices, Tithes, Divorces, and such other Ecclesiasticall causes. In every other severall part almost throughout the Kingdome, there sitteth but one Judge alone in a place about these matters. In criminall causes, Courts of cri∣minall matters. the Kings chiefe Justice holdeth his Court for the most part at Edenburgh (which office the Earles of Argile have executed now for some yeeres.) And he doth depute two or three Lawyers, who have the hearing and deci∣ding of capitall actions concerning life and death, or of such as inferre losse of limbs, or of all goods. In this Court the Defendant is permitted, yea in case of high treason, to entertaine a Counsellor or Advocate to pleade his cause. Moreover, in criminall matters there are sometimes by vertue of the Kings com∣mission and authoritie, Justices appointed for the deciding of this or that particular cause. Also the Sheriffes in their territories, and Magistrates in some Burghs, may sit in judgement of man-slaughter (in case the man-slayer be taken within 24. houres after the deed committed) and being found guiltie by a Jurie, put him to death. But if that time be once overpast, the cause is referred and put over to the Kings Iustice, or his Deputies. The same priviledge also some of the Nobilitie and Gentrie enjoy a∣gainst theeves taken within their owne jurisdictions. There bee likewise that have such Roialties, as that in criminall causes they may exercise a jurisdiction within their owne limits, and in some cases recall those that dwell within their owne limits and li∣berties from the Kings Justice, howbeit with a caution and proviso interposed, That they judge according to Law. Thus much briefly have I put downe, as one that hath but sleightly looked into these matters, yet by the information of the judicious Knight, Sir Alexander Hay, his Majesties Secretarie for that kingdome, who hath therein given me good light. But as touching SCOTLAND, what a noble countrey it is, and what men it breedeth (as sometimes the Geographer wrote of Britaine) there will within a while more certaine and more evident matter be delivered, since that most high and mightie Prince hath set it open now for us, which had so long time beene shut from us. Meane while I will come unto the description of places, the project that I entended especially. GADENI, or LADENI. U Pon the Ottadini, or Northumberland, bordered as next neighbours the , that is GADENI, who also by the inversion or tur∣ning of one letter upside downe, are called in some Copies of Ptolo∣mee, LADENI, seated in that countrey which lieth betweene the mouth of the river Twede and Edenburgh Forth: and is at this day divided into many petty Countries: the chiefe whereof are Teifidale, Twedale Merch, and Lothien, in Latine Lodeneium, under which one generall name alone the Writers of the middle time comprised all the rest. TEIFIDALE. T Eifidale, that is to say, the Vale by the river Teifie, or Teviat, lying next unto England, among the edges of high craggie hills, is in∣habited by a warlike nation, which by reason of so many en∣counters in foregoing ages betweene Scottish and English, are al∣waies most readie for service and sudden invasions. The first place among these that wee meet with, is Iedburgh, a Burrough well inhabited and frequented, standing neere unto the confluence of Teifie and Ied, whereof it took the name: also Mailros, a very ancient Monastery, wherein, at the beginning of our Church, were cloistered Monkes of that ancient or∣der and institution, that gave themselves to prayer, and with their hand-labour ear∣ned their living; which holy King David restored, and replenished with Cistertian Monkes. Roxburg. And more Eastward, where Twede and Teifie joine in one streame, Ros∣burg sheweth it selfe, called also Roxburg, and in old time MARCHIDUN, because it was a towne in the Marches; where stands a Castle, that for naturall situation and towred fortifications, was in times past exceeding strong. Which being surprised and held by the English, whiles James the second King of Scots encircled it with a siege, hee was by a peece of a great Ordnance that brake, slaine untimely in the very floure of his youth; a Prince much missed and lamented of his Subjects. As for the castle, it was yeelded; and being then for the most part of it layed even with the ground, is now in a manner quite vanished and not to bee seene. The territory ad∣joyning, called of it the Sherifdome of Roxburg, hath one hereditary Sheriffe out of the family of the Douglasses, who is usually called the Sheriffe of Teviot Dale. And now hath Roxburg also a Baron, Robert Kerr, through the favour of King James the sixth, out of the family of the Kerrs, a famous house, and spred into a number of bran∣ches, as any one in that tract: out of which the Fernhersts, and others inured in mar∣tiall feats, have been of great name. Twede aforesaid runneth through the middest of a Dale, taking name of it, reple∣nished with sheepe that beare wooll of great request. A very goodly river this is, which springing more inwardly Eastward, after it hath passed, as it were, in a streight channell by Drimlar Castle, by Peblis a mercate towne, which hath for the Sheriff thereof Baron Zeister, like as Selkirk hard by hath another out of the family of Murray of Fallohill, entertaineth Lauder a riveret; at which appeareth Lau∣der, together with Thirlestan : where stands a very faire house of Sir John Mettellan, late Chancellor of Scotland, whom, for his singular wisdome, King James the sixth created Baron of Thirlestan. Then Twede beneath Roxburg, augmented with the ri∣ver of Teviot resorting unto him, watereth the Sherifdome of Berwick throughout; a great part whereof is possessed by the Humes (wherein the chiefe man of that fami∣ly exerciseth now the jurisdiction of a Sheriffe) and so passeth under Berwick, the strongest towne of Britain (whereof I have spoken already) where hee is exceeding full of Salmons, and so falleth into the sea. MERCHIA, MERCH, or MERS. M ERCH, which is next, and so named because it is a march coun∣try, lyeth wholly upon the German sea. In this, first Hume Ca∣stle sheweth it selfe, the ancient possession of the Lords of Home, or Hume, who being descended from the family of the Earles of Merch, are growne to be a noble and faire spred family: out of which Alexander Hume, who before was the first Baron of Scotland, and Sheriff of Berwick, was of late advanced by James King of great Britaine to the title of Earle Hume. Earle Hume. Kelso. Neere unto which lieth Kelso, fa∣mous sometime for the monastery, which with thirteen others, King David the first of that name built out of the ground, for the propagation of Gods glory, but to the great empairing of the Crowne land. Coldingham. Colania. Then is to be seene Coldingham, which Bede calleth the City Coldana, and the Ci∣ty of Coludum, haply COLANIA mentioned by Ptolomee, a place consecrated many ages since unto professed Virgins or Nunnes, whose chastity is recorded in ancient bookes. For that they, together with Ebba their Prioresse, cut off their owne noses and lips, choosing rather to preserve their virginity from the Danes, than their beau∣ty and favour: and yet for all that the Danes burnt their monasterie, and them with∣all. Hard by is Fast-castle, a castle of the Lords Humes, so called for their firmnesse and strength thereof, at the Promontory of the said Saint Ebbe, who being the daughter of Edilfria King of Northumberland, when her Father was taken prisoner, got hold of a boat in Humber, and passing along the raging Ocean, landed here in safety, became renowned for her sanctimony, and left her name unto the place. But this Merch is mentioned in the Historiographers, a great deale more for the Earles thereof, than for any places therein, who for martiall prowesse were highly renow∣ned, and descended from Gospatricke Earle of Northumberland, whom after he was fled from William Conqueror of England, Malcom Canmor, that is, With the great head, King of Scotland, entertained, enriched him with the castle of Dunbar, and honou∣red with the Earldome of Merch. Whose posterity, besides other goodly and faire lands in Scotland, held (as appeareth plainly in an old Inquisition) the Barony of Ben∣geley in Northumberland, that they should be Inborow and Utborow, betweene Eng∣land and Scotland. What the meaning should be of these tearmes let others ghesse, what my conjecture is I have said already. In the reigne of King James the first, George de Dunbar Earle of Merch by authority of Parliament, for his Fathers rebel∣lion lost the Propriety and possession of the Earledome of Merch, and the Seignorie of Dunbar. And when as hee proved by good evidences and writings brought forth, that his father had beene pardoned for that fault by the Regents of the Kingdome, he was answered againe, that it was not in the Regents power to pardon an offence against the State; and that it was expressely provided by the Lawes, that children should undergoe punishment for their fathers transgressions, to the end that being thus heires to their fathers rashnesse, as they are to their goods and lands, they should not at any time in the haughty pride of their owne power, plot any treason against Prince or country. This title of Earle of March, among other honourable titles, was given afterward to Alexander Duke of Albany, and by him forfaited. And in our re∣membrance, this title of honour was revived againe in Robert, the third brother of Mathew Earle of Lennox, who being of a Bishop of Cathanes made Earle of Lennox, resigned up that title soone after unto his nephew, then created Duke of Lennox: and he himselfe in lieu thereof received of the King the name and stile of the Earle of Merch. LAUDEN, or LOTHIEN. L OTHIEN, Lauden▪ which is also called Lauden, named in times past of the Picts, Pictland, shooteth out along from Merch unto the Scottish sea, or the Forth, having many hils in it, and little wood; but for fruitfull corn-fields, for courtesie also and civility of man∣ners, commended above all other countries of Scotland. About the yeere of our salvation 873. Eadgar King of England (be∣tweene whom and Keneth the third, King of Scots, there was a great knot of alliance against the Danes, common enemies to them both) resigned up his right unto him in this Lothien, as Matthew the Florilegus. Flour-gatherer witnesseth: and to winne his heart the more unto him, He gave unto him many mansions in the way, wherein both he and his successours, in their comming unto the Kings of England, and in returne homeward might be lodged: which unto the time of K. Henry the second continued in the hands of the Kings of Scotland. In this Lothien, the first place that offereth it selfe unto our sight upon the sea side is Dunbar, a passing strong castle in old time, Earles of Dun∣bar. and the seat of the Earles of Merch aforesaid, who thereup∣on on were called Earles of Dunbar. A Peece many a time wonne by English, and as of∣ten recovered by the Scottish. But in the yeere 1567. by authority of the States in Parliament it was demolished, because it should not be an hold and place of refuge for rebels. But James King of great Britain conferred the title and honour of Earle of Dunbar upon Sir George Hume, for his approved fidelity, whom he had created be∣fore Baron Hume of Barwick, to him, his heires, and assignes. Hard by, Tine a little ri∣ver after it hath runne a short course, falleth into the sea; neere unto the spring-head whereof standeth Zeister, which hath his Baron out of the family of the Haies Earles of Aroll, who also is by inheritance Sheriffe of the little territory of Twedall, or Pe∣blis. By the same riveret, some few miles higher, is seated Hadington or Hadina, in a wide and broad plaine: which towne the English fortified with a deepe and large ditch, with a mure or rampire also without, foure square, and with foure bulwarkes at the corners, and with as many other at the inner wall: and Sir Iames Wilford, an Englishman valiantly defended it against Dessie the Frenchman, 1548. who with ten thou∣sand French and Dutch together fiercely assaulted it, untill that by reason of the plague, which grew hot among the garrison souldiers, Henry Earle of Rutland comming with a royall army, raised the siege, removed the French, and having laid the munitions levell, conducted the English home. And now of late, King James the sixth, hath ranged Sir Iohn Ramsey among the Nobles of Scotland, with title and honour of Vicount Hadington, Vicount Ha∣dington. for his faithfull valour, as whose RIGHT HAND was the DEFENDER OF PRINCE AND COUNTREY, in that most wicked conspi∣racy of the Gowries against the Kings person. Touching this Hadington thus hath Master I. Ionston versified. Planities praetensa jacet prope flumina Tinae, Flumini arguti clauditur ista sinu. Vulcani & Martis quae passa incendia, fati Ingemit alterno vulnere fracta vices. Nunc tandem sapit icta. Dei praecepta secuta Praesidio gaudet jam potiore Poli. Before it lies a spacious plaine, the Tine his streame hard by, In bosome of that river shrill, this towne enclos'd doth lie. Which having suffered grievous smart of fire and sword by turnes, Grones under these misfortunes much, and for her losses mournes. But now at length selfe-harmes have made it wise, and by Gods lore Directed, helpe it hath from heaven, which steedeth it much more. Athelstanford. Within a little of Hadington standeth Athelstanford, so called of Athelstane, a chiefe leader of the English, slaine there with his men about the yeere 815. But that he should be that warlike Athelstane, which was King of the West-Saxons, both the account of the times, and his owne death doe manifestly controlle it. Above the mouth of this Tine, in the very bending of the shore, standeth Tantal∣lon Castle; from whence Archibald Douglas Earle of Angus, wrought James the fifth, King of Scots, much teene and trouble. Here by retiring backe of the shores on both sides, is roome made for a most noble arme of the sea, and the same well furnished with Ilands, which by reason of many rivers encountring it by the way, and the tides of the surging sea together, spreadeth exceeding broad: Ptolomee cal∣leth it BODERIA, Bodotria. Tacitus BODOTRIA, of the depth, as I guesse; the Scots The Forth, and Frith ; we Edenburgh Frith ; others the Fresian sea, and the Scottish sea, and the Eulogium, Tantallon. Morwiridh. Upon this, after you be past Tantallon, are seated, first, North-Berwick, a famous place sometime for an house there of religious Virgins : and then Dyrlton, Dyrlton. which belonged in times past to the notable family of the Haliburtous, and now to S. Tho. Ereskin Captain of the guard, whom James K. of great Britain for his happy valour, in preserving him against the traiterous attempts of Gowrye, first created Baron of Dirlton, and afterward advanced him to the honourable title of Vi∣count Felton, Vicount Fel∣ton. making him the first Vicount that ever was in Scotland. Against these places there lyeth in the sea, not far from the shore, the Iland Bas, which riseth up as it were all one craggy rocke, and the same upright and steep on every side: yet hath it a Block-house belonging to it, a fountaine also and pastures: but it is so hollowed with the waves working upon it, that it is almost pierced thorough. What a mul∣titude of sea-foules, and especially of those geese which they call Scouts and Soland geese, flocke hither at their times (for, by report, their number is such, that in a cleere day they take away the sunnes light) what a sort of fishes they bring (for as the speech goeth, Soland Geese, which seeme to be Plinies Picarinae. a hundred garrison souldiers that here lay for defence of the place, fed upon no other meat but the fresh fish that they brought in) what a quantity of stickes and little twigges they get together for the building of their nests, so that by their meanes the inhabitants are abundantly provided of fewell for their fire; what a mighty gaine groweth by their feathers and oyle, the report thereof is so incredible, that no man scarcely would beleeve it, but he that had seene it. Then as the shore draweth backe Seton sheweth it selfe; Seton. which seemeth to have taken that name of the situation by the sea side, and to have imparted the same unto a right noble house of the Setons, branched out of an English family, and from the daughter of King Robert Brus: out of which the Marquesse Huntley, Robert Earle of Wentoun, Earle of Wen∣toun. Alexander Earle of Dunfirmling, advanced to honors by K. James the sixth, are propagated. After this the river Eske dischargeth it selfe into this Frith, Borthwick. when it hath runne by Borthwic (which hath Barons surnamed according to that name, and those deriving their pedegree out of Hungary) by Newbottle, Newbottle. that is, The new building, sometimes a faire monasterie, now the Barony of Sir Mark Ker: by Dalkeith, Dalkeith. Musselborrow. a very pleasant habi∣tation of the late Earles of Morton, and Musselborrow, hard under which, in the yeere of our Lord 1547. when Sir Edward Seimor Duke of Somerset, with an army roy∣all had entred Scotland, to claime and challenge the keeping of a covenant made, concerning a marriage betweene Marie Queene of Scotland, and Edward the sixth King of England, there happened the heaviest day that ever fell, to the adven∣turous youth of the most noble families in all Scotland, who there lost their lives. Here I must not over-passe in silence this Inscription, which John Napier, a learned man, hath in his Commentaries upon the Apocalyps recorded to have beene here digged up, and which the right learned Knight Sir Peter Young, teacher and trainer of King James the sixth in his youth, hath in this wise more truely copi∣ed forth. APOLLINI GRANNO Q. LUSIUS SABINIA NUS Procurator. PROC AUG Votum susce∣ptum solvit lu∣bens merito. V.S.S.L.V.M Who this Apollo Granus might bee, Apollo Gran∣nus. and whence hee should have this name, not one, to my knowledge, of our grave Senate of Antiquaries hitherto could ever tell: But if I might be allowed, from out of the lowest bench, to speak what I think, I would say that Apollo Granus amongst the Romans, was the same that , that is, Apollo with long haire amongst the Greekes. for Isidor calleth the long haire of the Gothes, Grannos. But here I may seem to wander out of my way, and therefore will returne to it. Lower yet, Edenborrow. and neere unto the Scotish Forth, is seated EDENBUROUGH, which the Irish Scots call Dun Eaden, that is, the towne Eaden, or Eden Hill, and which no doubt is the very same that Ptolomee named , that is, The Winged Castle: for Adain in the British tongue signifieth a wing; and Edenborrow (a word compounded out of the British and Saxon language) is nothing else but The Burgh with wings. From Wings therefore wee must fetch the reason of the name: and fetched it may be, if you thinke good, either from the Companies of Horse∣men, which are called Wings, or else from those Wings in Architecture, which the great Master builders tearme P eroma , that is, as Vetruvius sheweth, two Wall so rising up in heigth, as that they resemble a shew of Wings: which, for that a cer∣taine City of Cyprus wanted, it was called in old time (as wee read in the Geogra∣phers) Aptera, that is, Without Wings. But if any man beleeve that the name was de∣rived from Ebr k a Britaine, or from Heth a Pic , good leave have he for me, I will not confront them with this my conjecture. This Citie in regard of the high situation, of the holsome are and plentifull soile, and many Noble mens towred houses built round about it, watered also with cleere springing fountaines, reaching from East to West a mile out in length, and carrying halfe as much in bredth, is worthily counted the chiefe Citie of the whole King∣dome; strongly walled, adorned with houses as well publike as private, well peo∣pled and frequented, by reason of the opportunity from the sea which the neighbour haven at Leth affordeth. And as it is the seat of the Kings, so is it the oracle also, or closet of the Lawes, and the very Palace of Justice. For the high Courts of Par∣liament are here for the most part holden, for the enacting or repealing of Lawes: also the Session, and the Court of the Kings Justice, and of the Commissariat, where∣of I have spoken already, are here settled and kept. On the East side, hard unto the Monastery of Saint Crosse, or Holy ruide, is the Kings palace, which King David the first built: over which, within a Parke stored with game, riseth an hill with two heads, called of Arthur the Britaine, Arthurs Chaire. On the West side a most steepe rocke mounteth up aloft to a stately heigth every way, save onely where it looketh toward the City: on which is placed a Castle with many a towre in it, so strong that it is counted impregnable, which the Britans cal∣led Castle Myned Agne , the Scots, The Maidens Castle, and the Virgins Castle, of cer∣taine young maidens of the Picts royall blood, who were kept there in old time, and which may seeme in truth to have beene that Castrum Alatum, or Castle with A∣VVING, abovesaid. How Edenborrow in the alternative fortune of warres was subject one while to the Scots, and another while to the English, who inhabited this East part of Scot∣land, untill it became wholly under the Scots dominion, about the yeere of our salva∣tion 960. what time the English Empire, sore shaken with the Danish wars, lay as it were gasping and dying. How also, as an old booke Of the division of Scotland, in the Library of the right honourable Lord Burghley late high Treasurer of England, Oppidum Eden. sheweth: Whiles Indulph reigned, the town of Eden was voided and abandoned to the Scots unto this present day, as what variable changes of reciprocall fortune it hath felt from time to time, the Hi∣storiographers doe relate, and out of them ye are to be enformed. Meane while read if you please these verses of that most worthy man Master I. Jonston, in praise of E∣denborrow. Monte sub acclivi Zephyri procurrit in auras Hinc arx celsa, illinc Regia clara nitet. Inter utramque patet sublimibus ardua tectis Urbs armis animis, clara frequensque viris. Nobile Scotorum caput, & pars maxima regni, Penè etiam gentis integra regna suae. Rarae artes & opes, quod mens optaverit aut hîc Invenias, aut non Scotia tota dabit. Compositum hîc populum videas, sanctum que Senatum, Sanctáque cum puro lumine jura Dei. An quisquam Arctoi extremo in limite mundi Aut haec aut paria his cernere posse putet? Dic hospes, postquàm externas lustraveris urbes, Haec cernens, oculis credis an ipse tuis? Under the rising of an hill, Westward there shoots one way A castle high; on th'other side the Kings house gorgeous gay. Betweene them both the citie stands, tall buildings shew it well, For armes, for courage much renown'd, much people therein dwell. The Scots head citie large and faire, the kingdomes greatest part, Nay, even the nations kingdome whole well neere, by just desart. Rare arts and riches: what ones minde can wish is therein found, Or else it will not gotten be throughout all Scottish ground. A civill people here a man may see, a Senate grave, Gods holy lawes with purest light of Preachers here ye have. In parts remote of Northren clime would any person weene, That ever these, or such like things might possibly be seene? Say Travailer, now after that thou forraine towne hast knowne, Beholding this, beleevest thou these eyes that are thine owne? A mile from hence lyeth Leth, Lyth. a most commodious haven, hard upon the river Leth, which when Dessey the Frenchman for the securitie of Edenborrow had fortifi∣ed, by reason of manie men repairing thither, within a short time from a meane vil∣lage it grew to be a bigge towne. Againe, when Francis the second, King of France, had taken to wife Marie the Queene of Scots, the Frenchmen, who in hope and con∣ceit had already devoured Scotland, and began now to gape for England, in the yeere 1560. strengthened it with more fortifications. But Elizabeth Queene of England, solicited by the Nobles of Scotland that embraced the reformed religion to side with them, by her puissance and wisdome effected, that both they returned into France, and these their fortifications were laied levell with the ground, and Scotland ever since hath been freed from the French. Where this Forth groweth more and more narrow, Caer Guidi. it had in the middest of it the citie Caer-Guidi, as Bede noteth, which now may seeme to be the Island named Inch-Keith. Whether this were that VICTORIA which Ptolomee mentioneth, I will not stand to prove: although a man may beleeve, that the Romans turned this Guidh into Victoria, as well as the Isle Guith or Wight into Victesis or Vecta: certes, seeing both these Islands bee dissevered from the shore, the same reason of the name will hold well in both languages. For Ninius hath taught us, that Guith in the British tongue betokeneth a separation. More within, upon the same Forth is situate A∣bercorn, in Bedes time a famous Monasterie, which now by the gracious favour of King James the sixth, Earle of Aber∣corn. Black-nesse. giveth unto James Hamilton the title of the Earle of Abercorn : And fast beside it standeth Blacknesse Castle; and beneath it Southward, the ancient citie LINDUM, whereof Ptolomee maketh mention: which the better learned as yet call Linlithquo, Linlithquo. commonly Lithquo, beautified and set out with a verie faire house of the Kings, a goodly Church, and a fishfull lake; of which lake it may seeme to have assumed that name: for Lin, as I have already shewed, in the British tongue sound∣eth as much as a Lake. A Sheriffe it had in times past by inheritance out of the fami∣ly of the Hamiltons of Peyle: Earle of Lin∣lithquo. and now in our dayes it hath for the first Earle, Sir A∣lexander Levingston, whom King James the sixth raised from the dignitie of a Baron, wherein his Ancestours had flourished a long time, to the honour of an Earle: like as within a while after he promoted Mark Ker, Earle of Lo∣thien. Baron of Newbottle aforesaid, to the ti∣tle of Earle of Lothien. SELGOVAE. B Eneath the GADENI, toward the South and West, where now are the small territories of Lidesdale, Eusdale, Eskdale, Annan∣dale, and Nidesdale, so called of little rivers running through them, which all lose themselves in Solway Frith, dwelt in anci∣ent times the SELGOVAE; the reliques of whose name seeme unto mee, whether unto others I know not, to remaine in that name Solway. Liddesdale. In Lidesdale there riseth aloft Armitage, so called, because it was in times past dedicated to a solitarie life; now it is a very strong Castle, which belonged to the Hepburns, Hepburnes Earles of Bothwell. who draw their originall from a certaine Englishman a prisoner, whom the Earle of March, for delivering him out of a danger, greatly enriched. These were Earles of Bothwell, and a long time by the right of inheritance Admirals of Scotland. But by a filter of James Earle of Bothwel, the last of the Hepburns, married unto John Prior of Coldingham, base sonne to King James the fifth (who begat too too many bastards) the title and inheritance both came unto his son. Brakensey. Hard by is Brakensey, the habitation of the warlike family of Baclugh, Backlugh. surnamed Scot ; beside many little piles or sorts of militarie men everie where. Eusdale. Uzbllhum. In Eusdale, I would deeme by the affinite of the name, that old UZBLLUM, mentioned by Ptolomee, stood by the river Euse. In Eskdale some are of opinion that the HORESTI dwelt, into whose borders Iu∣lius Agricola, when he had subdued the Britans inhabiting this tract, brought the Ro∣man armie: especially if we read Horesci in stead of Horesti. For Ar-Esc in the British tongue betokeneth a place by the river Eske. Eskedale. Horesci. As for Aesica in Eskdale, I have spoken of it before in England, and there is no cause wherefore I should iterate the same. ANNANDALE. Annandale. U Nto this on the West side adjoyneth ANNANDALE, that is, The vale by the river Annan ; into which the accesse by land is very difficult. The pla∣ces of greater note herein are these: Lough Maban. a castle by Lough-Mahan, three parts whereof are environed with water, and strongly walled; and the towne Annandale, at the very mouth almost of the river Annan: which lost all the glo∣rie and beautie it had, by the English warre in the reigne of Edward the sixth. In this territorie, the Ionstons are men of greatest name; a kinred even bred to warre: betweene, whom and the Maxwels there hath beene professed an open en∣mitie over long, even to deadly feud and blood-shed: The Stewartie of Annandale. which Maxwels by right from their ancestours, have the rule of this Seneschalsie, for so it is accounted. This vale Eadgar King of Scots, after hee was restored to his kingdome by auxiliarie forces out of England, gave in consideration and reward of good service, unto Ro∣bert Bruse or Brus Lord of Cliveland in Yorke-shire; who with the good favour of the King bestowed it upon Robert his younger sonne, when himselfe would not serve the King of Scots in his warres. The Bruses. From him flowered the Bruses Lords of Annandale, of whom Robert Brus married Isabel, the daughter of William King of Scots by the daughter of Robert Avenall: his sonne likewise, Robert the third of the name, wedded the daughter of David Earle of Huntington and of Gariosh: whose sonne Robert, surname The Noble, when the issue of Alexander the third King of Scots sailed, challenged in his mothers right the Kingdome of Scotland, before Edward the first King of England, ( as the direct and superiour Lord of the Kingdome of Scotland (so the English give it out) or, an honourable Arbitratour (for to say the Scots) as being neerer in proximitie, in degree and blood, to King Alex∣ander the third and Margaret, daughter to the King of Norway, although bee were the sonne by a second sister: who soon after resigning up his own right, granted and gave over to his son Robert Brus Earle of Carrick, and to his heires (I speak out of the verie origi∣nall) all the right and claime, which he had or might have to the Kingdome of Scotland. But the action and suit went with John Balliol, who sued for his right, us descended of the eldest sister, although in a degree farther off: and sentence was given in these words, For that the person more remote in the second degree descending in the first line, is to bee preferred before a n erer in a second line, in the succession of an inheritance that cannot be parted. How beit, the said Robert, sonne to the Earle of Carrick, by his own vertue at length recovered the Kingdome unto himself, and established it to his posteritie. A Prince, who as he flourished notably in regard of the glorious ornaments of his no∣ble acts, so he triumphed as happily with invincible fortitude and courage, over for∣tune that so often crossed him. NIDISDALL. C Lose unto Annandale on the West side lyeth NIDISDALE, su∣ficiently with corne-fields and pastures; so named of the river Nid, The river Nid which in Ptolomee is wrongly written NOBIUS, for NODIUS or NIDIUS: of which name there bee other rivers in Britaine, full of shallow foords and muddie shelves, like as this NID is also. It springeth out of the Lake Logh-Cure, by which flourished CORDA, Corda. a towne of the Selgova. He taketh his course first by Sauqhuera Castle of the Creightons, Creightons Barons de Sauquer. Earles of Mor∣ton. who a long time kept a great port, as enjoying the dignitie of the Barons of Sauqhuer, and the authoritie besides of here∣ditarie Sheriffs of Nidisdale: then by Morton, which gave title of Earle to some of the family of Douglas: out of which others of that surname have their mansion and abiding at Drumlanrig, by the same river: neere unto the mouth whereof standeth Danfreys betweene two hills, Dunfreis. the most flourishing towne of this tract: which hath to shew also an old Castle in it, famous for making of woollen clothes, and remarka∣ble for the murder of John Commin, the mightiest man for manred and retinew in all Scotland; whom Roberts Brus, for feare he should foreclose his way to the kingdome, ranne quite through with his sword in the Church, and soon obtained his pardon from the Pope, for committing that murder in a sacred place. Neerer unto the mouth, Solway, a little village retaineth still somewhat of the old name of Selgova. Upon the verie mouth is situate Caer Laverock, Caer Lave∣rock. which Prolomee I supposed called CARBAN∣TORIGUM, accounted an imprenable sort, when King Edward the first, accompani∣ed with the floure of English Nobilitie, besieged and hardly wonne it: but now it is a weake dwelling house of the Barons of Maxwell, who being men of an ancient and noble linage, were a long time Wardens of these West matches, and of late ad∣vanced by marriage with the daughter one of the heires of the Earle of Morton; whereby John Lord Maxwell was declared Earle of Morson: as also by the daughter and heire of Hereis Lord Toricles, whom I a younger sonne took to wife, and obtai∣ned by the title of Baron Hereis. Barons Hereis, Clencar. Moreover, in this vale by the Lake side lyeth Glencarn, whence the Cunninghams, of whom I am to write more in place conveni∣ent, bare a long time the title of Earle. This Nidisdale, together with Annandale, nourisheth a warlike kind of men, who have beene infamous for robberies and depredations: for they dwell upon Solway Frish, a fourdable arme of the sea at low waters, through which they made many times outrodes into England for to fetch in booties, Salmons. and in which the inhabitants thereabout on both sides with pleasant pastime and delightfull sight on horse-backe with speares hunt Salmons, whereof there is abundance. What manner of cattaile∣stealers these be, that inhabite these vales in the marches of both kingdomes, John Lesley, The behaviour of Scottish burderers. himselfe a Scottish man, and Bishop of Rosse, will tell you in these words. They go forth in the night by troops out of there own borders, through desart by-waies, and ma∣ny winding crankes. All the day time they refresh their burses, and recreate their owne strength in lurking places appointed before band, until they be come thither as length, in the dark night, where they would be. When they have laid hold of a bootie, back again they returne home likewise by night, through blinde waies onely, and fetching many a compasse about. The more skilfull any leader or guide is, to passe through those wild desarts, crooked turnings, and steep downe-falls, in the thickest mists and deepest darknesse, hee is held in grea ter reputation, as one of an excelling wit. And so craftie and these are, that sel∣dome or never they forgo their bootie, and suffer it to be taken out of their hands, unlesse it happen otherwhiles that they be caught by their adversaries following continually after, and tracing them directly by their footing, according as quick-senting Slugh-bounds doe lead them. But say they be taken, so faire spoken they are and eloquen, so manie sugred words they have at will, sweetly to plead for them, that they are able to move the Iudges and adversaries both, he they never so austere and severe, if not to mercie, yet to admira∣tion, amd some commiseration withall. NOVANTES, GALLOWAY. F Rom Nidisdale as you goe on Westward, the NOVANTES inha∣bited in the vales, all that tract which runneth out far and wide to∣ward the West, between the sea and Dunbritain Frith, or Clyds∣forth: yet so indented and hollowed with nookes and creekes, that here and there it is drawne into a narrow roome: and then againe in the verie utmost skirt it openeth and spreadeth it selfe broad at more libertie: whereupon some have called it the CHERSOMESUS, that is, The Biland of the NOVANTES. But at this day their coun∣trey containeth Galloway, Carick, Kyle, and Cunningham. Galloway. Galloway, in the Latine Writers of the middle time Gaelwallia and Gallovidia, so called of the Irish, who in times past dwelt there, and terme themselves short in their owne language Gael, is a countrey rising up everie where with bills, that are better for feeding of cattell than bearing of corne: the inhabitants practice fishing, as well within the sea lying round about them, as in little rivers, and the Loches or meeres in everie place standing full of water at the foot of the hills: out of which in Septem∣ber they take in Weeles and Weere-ners, an incredible number of most sweet and favourite eeles, Galloway nagges. whereby the make no lesse gain than others do by their little nagges, which for being well limmed, fast knit, and strongly made for to endure travaile, are much in request and bought from hence. Among these, the first place that offereth itselfe by the river DEA, The river Dee. mentioned in Prolomee, which keeping the name still full and whole, Kircoubright. they call Dee, is Kircoubright, the most commodious port of this coast, & the second Stewartie of Scotland, which belongeth also to the Maxwels: then Cardines, a sort set upon a craggie and high rocke by the river Fleet, and fensed with strong walls. Neere unto it the river Ken, corruptly read in Ptolomee IENA, runneth into the sea: after it is Wigton, an haven towne with a narrow entrance unto it, between the two rivers, Bluidnoo and Crea, which also is counted a Sheriffdome, over which Agnew is Sheriffe. Earles of Wig∣ton. In times past it had for Earle Archibald Douglasse, renowned in the French warre, and at this day, by the favour of King James the sixth, John Lord Fleming, who deriveth his pedegree from the ancient Earles of Wigton. Leucopibia. Neere unto this Ptolomee placed the Citie LEUCOPIBIA, which I know not, to say truth, where to seeke. Yet the place requireth that it should be that Episcopall seat of Ninian, which Bede calleth Candida Casa, and the English and Scottish in the verie same sense whit-berne: what say you then if Ptolomee after his manner transla∣ted that name in Greek , Herna house or habitation. that is, white-houses (in stead whereof the Or Copiers. Tran∣scribers have thrust upon us Leucopibia ) which the Britans tearmed Candida Casa. In this place Ninia or Ninian the Britan, an holy man, the first that instructed the South-Picts in Christian saith, in the reigne of the Emperour Theodofius the younger, had his seat, and built a Church consecrated to the memorie of Saint Martin, after a manner unusuall among the Britans, as Bede saith, who wrote that the English in his time held this country, and when the number of the faithfull Christians multiplied, an Episcopall See was erected at this Candida Casa. A little higher there is a Bi-land having the sea insinuating it selfe on both sides with two Bayes, that by a narrow neck it is adjoined to the firme land: and this is properly called CHERSONESUS, and PROMONTORIUM NOVANTUM, commonly, the Mull of Galloway. Beyond this Northward, there is a Bay taking a great compasse, and full of Ilands, into which very many rivers on everie side doe out-lade themselves. But first of all, from the verie cape or top of the Promontarie is ABRAVANUS, which being set lit∣tle out of his own place, is so called of Ptolomee, for Aber-Ruanus, that is, The mouth of Ruan. For at this day that river is named Rian, and the lake out of which it flow∣eth, Logh-Rian, exceeding full of Herrings and Stone-fishes. This Galloway had in times past Princes and Lords over it: Lords of Gal∣loway. of whom the first re∣corded in Chronicles was Fergus, in the reigne of Henrie the first, King of England, who gave for his Armes, A Lion rampant Arg, crowned Or in a shield Azur: who af∣ter many troubles that he had stirred, was driven to this exigent by King Malcolm, that he gave his sonne Ucthred to the King for an hostage, and himselfe wearie of this world, tooke the habit of a Chanon at Holy Rood house in Edenburgh. As for Uc∣thred, Gilbert his younger brother tooke him prisoner in battaile, and when hee had cut out his tongue, and plucked his eyes forth of his head, he cruelly bereaved him both of life and inheritance. But within some few yeeres, when Gilbert was dead, Ucthreds sonne recovered his fathers inheritance, who of a sister of William Morvill Constable of Scotland, Constables of Scotland. begat Alan Lord of Galloway, and Constable of Scotland: This Alan, by Margaret the eldest daughter of David Earle of Huntingdon, had Der∣volgilda wife to Iohn Balliol, and the mother of John Balliol King of Scotland, who contended with Robert Brus for the Kingdome of Scotland; and by a former wife, as it seemeth, hee had Helen, married to Roger Quincy Earle of Winchester, who thereby was Constable of Scotland; like as William Ferrars of Groby, the Nephew of the said Roger by a daughter and one of the heires. But these Englishmen soone lost their inheritance in Scotland, as also the dignitie of Constable: which the Com∣nins Earles of Bucquan, descended likewise from a daughter of Roger Quincie, obtai∣ned, until it was translated unto the Earls of Arroll. But the title of the Lords of Gal∣loway fell afterward to the family of the Douglasses. CARRICTA. CARRICT. N Ow followeth Carrict upon Dunbritain Frith, Berigonium, Bargenie. faire to be seene with fresh pastures; supplyed both by land and sea with com∣modities abundantly. In this province Ptolomee placed RERI∣GONIUM a Creeke, and RERIGONIUM a Towne. For which BERIGONIUM is read in a verie ancient copie of Ptolomee, prin∣ted at Rome in the yeere 1480. so that wee cannot but verily thinke it was that which now is called Bargeney. A Lord it hath out of the family of the Kennedies, which came forth of Ireland in the reigne of Ro∣bert Brus, and is in this tract of high birth, spread into many branches, and of great power. The chiefe of which linage is Earle of Cassile: for this is the name of a Castle wherein he dwelleth by the river Dun: upon the banke whereof he hath also another Castle, named Dunnur: and he is the hereditarie Bailiffe of this Countrey. For this Carrict, together with Kyle and Cunningham, are counted the three Bailler∣ries of Scotland, because they that governe these with an ordinarie power and juris∣diction are called Ballives, by a tearme that came up in the middle times, and among the Greeks, Sicilians, and Frenchmen signifieth a Conservatour or Protector. But in the age aforegoing Carrict had Earles: Earles of Car∣rict. Book of Mal∣rosse. for, to say nothing of Gilberts of Galloway, sonne unto whom King William gave all Carrict to bee possessed for ever, wee read that Adam of Kilconath was about the yeere 1270. Earle of Carrict, and died ser∣ving in the Holy-land: whose onely daughter Mariha fell extremely in love with Robert Brus, a beautifull young Gentleman, as she saw him hunting, and thereupon made him her husband, advanced him with the title of Earle, and with possessions: unto whom she bare Robert Brus, that most renowned King of Scots, from whom the royall line of the Kings is descended. But the title of the Earle of Carrict being left for a time to the younger sonnes of the family of Brus, afterwards among other honours encreased the stile of the Princes of Scotland. KYLE. Anno 750. M Ore inward from Clids-forth followeth KYLE, plentifull in all things, and as well inhabited. In Bedes Auctarium it is called Campus Cyel, that is, The Field Cyel, and Coil: where it is recor∣ded, That Eadbert King of Northumberland annexed this with o∣ther territories unto his owne Kingdome. In Ptolomees time there was known a place here named VIDOGARA, haply Aire, which is a Sherifdome, hath a townlet also of merchandise, and a well known port by a little river of the same name. Touching which I can thinke of no better thing to write, than these verses sent unto mee from Master Iohn Ionstoun. AERA, sive AERIA. Parva urbs, ast ingens animus in fortibus haeret, Inferior nulli nobilitate virûm. Aeris è campis haurit purissima coelum, Incubat & miti mollior aura solo. Aeria hinc, non Aera priùs credo illa vocata est, Cum duris quid enim mollia juris habent? Infera cum superis quod si componere fas est, Aurea fors dici debuit illa priùs. A City small, but yet great mindes in valiant bodies rest, For noblenesse of Gentlemen matching the very best. Out of the fields what aire it drawes is right pure, fresh, and kinde, The soile is milde, and upon it there breathes a gentle winde. Hence I suppose AERIA first, not Aera call'd it was, For what have elements to doe with matters hard as brasse? But to compare low things with high if that I may be bold, Then haply well it should have beene nam'd AUREA of old. Besides the river Aire there be other two riverets that water this little territorie, having many villages scattering along their bankes: namely, Longar, neere unto which the Caufords, and Cesnocke, by which the Cambels, families (in this tract) of good worship, dwell: upon the banke whereof standeth Uchiltre castle, the seat of the Stewarts that are of the blood royall, as who issued from the Dukes of Albanie ; and thereupon are the Barons of Uchiltrey, out of which house was that noble Robert Stewart, who kept continually with the Prince of Condie, as an inseparable compani∣on, and was with him slain in France in battaile. The government of Kyle belongeth by an heritable right to the Cambells of Louden, as Bailiffe thereof. CUNNINGHAM. C UNNINGHAM adjoyning to Kyle on the East side and the North, butteth upon the same Forth so close, that it restraineth the breadth thereof, which hitherto lay out and spread at large. The name, if one interpret it, is as much as the Kings Habitation: by which a man may ghesse how commodious and pleasant it is. This territorie is watered with Irwin, that divideth it from Kyle: at the spring-head well neere whereof, Kilmarnock shew∣eth it selfe, the dwelling place of the Barons Boids: of whom in the reigne of James the first, Thomas, by a prosperous gale of Court favour, was advanced to the autho∣ritie of Regent or Vice-Roy, Robert his sonne to the dignitie of Earle of Arran, and marriage with the Kings sister. But soone after, when the said gale came about, and blew contrarie, they were judged enemies to the State: Robert also had his wife ta∣ken from him, and given unto James Hamilton ; their goods were confiscate, fortune made a game of them, and when they had lost all they died in exile. Howbeit their posteritie recovered the ancient honour of Barons, and honorably enjoy it at this day. At the mouth of the river Irwin, standeth Irwin a Burrough, with an haven so barred up with shelves of sand, and so shallow withall, that it can beare none other vessels but small barkes and boates: Ardrossan also, a pile belonging to the Montgomeries, more above standeth higher over the Creeke: this is a verie ancient and famous fa∣miliy as any other, who have to shew for witnesse of their warlike prowesse, Poununy, a fort built with the ransome mony of Sir Henrie Percie, surnamed Hot-Spur, whom I. Montgomerie with his owne hand tooke prisoner in the battaile at Otterburne, and led away captive. Not farre from Ardrossan is Largis, embrued with the blood of the Norwegians by King Alexander the third. From whence, as you follow the shore bending and giving in, you meet with Eglington, a faire castle, which was the possession of certaine Gentlemen highly descended of the same surname: from whom it came by marriage unto the Montgomeries, Montgomeri Earles of Eg∣lington. who thereby received the title of Earles of Eglington. But whence the said surname should come, a man can hardly tell: this I know, that out of Normandie it came into England, and that divers families there were of the same name: but that in Essex, from which Sir Thomas Montgome∣rie, Knight of the order of the Garter, descended, in the reigne of Edward the fourth gave Armes a little different from these. This noble linage is faire and farre spread, and out of those of Gevan was that Gabriel de Lorges, called Earl of Montgomerie, Captain of the guard of Scots (which Charles the fifth King of France instituted for defence of his owne person, and his successors, in testimonie of their fidelitie, and his love toward them) who in running at tilt slew Henrie the second King of France, by occasion that a broken splint of his speare, where the helmet chanced to be open, entred at his eye, and pierced into his brain; and afterwards in that civill war, wherein all France was in a broile, whiles he took part with the Protestants, Cunningham Earls of Glen∣carne. he was apprehended and beheaded. But the Cunning∣hams in this tract are counted to be the greater and more numerous family, the chiefe whereof, enjoying the honour of Earle of Glencarn, dwelleth at Kilmauris, and fet∣cheth his descent out of England, and from an English Gentleman, who, together with other, killed Thomas Archbishop of Canterburie. How true this is I know not, but they ground it haply upon a probable conjecture, taken from an Archbishops pall, which the Cunninghams give in their coat of Armes. ISLE GLOTTA, OR ARRAN. W Ithin the sight of Cunningham, among sundry other Ilands, GLOTA, the Isle mentioned by Antonine the Emperour, bea∣reth up his head, in the very Forth and salt water of the river Glo∣ta, or Cluyd, called at this day Arran, of a castle bearing the same name. Inwardly it mounteth up altogether with high rising hills, at the bottome and foot whereof, along the shore it is well inha∣bited. The first Earle hereof, that I can read of, was Robert Boide, Earles of Ar∣ran. whose wife and Earldome together, when Boide was banished the realme, James L. Hamilton, as I said erewhile, obtained, and his posteritie enjoyed the same Earldome, saving that of late Sir James Steward, appointed guardian to James Ha∣milton Earle of Arran, when hee was so defective in understanding that he could not manage his estate, tooke this title in the right of being guardian. Neere unto this standeth Buthe, so called of a little religious Cell which Brenda∣nus founded (for so is a little Cell tearmed in the Scottish tongue.) In this Iland is Rothsay Castle, Rothsay Duke∣dome. which giveth the title of Dukedome unto the King of Scots eldest sonne, who is borne Prince of Scotland, Duke of Rothsay, and Seneschall of Scotland, since time that King Robert the third invested Robert his eldest sonne Duke of Roth∣say, the first in Scotland that ever was created Duke. With which title also Queene Marie honoured Henrie Lord Darly before she tooke him to be her husband. Then shew themselves Hellan, sometimes called Hellan Leneow, that it, as Iohn Fordon in∣terpreteth it, The Saints Ilands, and Hellan Tinoc, that is, The Swines Iland, with a great number of other Ilands of lesse note and reckoning in the same Forth. DAMNII, CLUYDSDALE, &c. B Eyond the NOVANTES, more inward, by the river Glotta or Cluyd, and farther still even to the verie East sea, dwelt in times past the DAMNII, in those countries, if I have any judgement, (for in things so farre remote from our remembrance, and in so thick a mist of obscuritie, who can speake of certaintie?) which are now callled Cluydsdale, the Baronie of Renfraw, Lennox, Strivelinshire, Menteth, and Fife. Neere unto the head of Cluyd in Crawford Moore, among the wilde wasts, certaine husbandmen of the countrey, after great store of violent raine, hap∣pened to finde certaine small peeces like scrapings of gold, which have this long time given great hope of much riches, but most of all in our dayes, since that Sir Beamis Bulmer undertooke with great endevour to finde out here a Mine of gold. Certes there is Azur gotten forth everie day, without any paines in manner at all. Now the Castle of Crawford, Earles of Crawford. together with the title of the Earle of Crawford, was by Robert the second, King of Scots, given unto Sir James Lindesey, who by a single combate performed with Baron Welles an Englishman, won high commen∣dation for his valour. These Lindeseyes have deserved passing well of their country, and are of ancient nobilitie, ever since that Sir William Lindesey married one of the heires of William of Lancaster Lord of Kandale in England, whose neice in the third degree of lineall descent, was married into the most honourable family of Coucy in France. Cluyd, after hee hath from his spring head with much struggling got out Northward by Baron Somervils house, Baronie So∣mervils. Douglasse. receiveth unto him from out of the West the river Duglasse or Douglasse, so called of a blackish or greenish water that it hath: which river communicateth his name both to have the vale through which hee runneth, called Douglasdale, and also to Douglasse castle therein: which name that castle like∣wise hath imparted unto the family of the Douglasses. Which I assure you is very an∣cient, but most famous ever since that Sir James Douglasse stucke verie close at all times as a most fast friend unto King Robert Brus, and was readie alwaies with sin∣gular courage, resolution, and wisdome, to assist him, claiming the kingdome in most troublesome and dangerous times: and whom the said King Robert charged at his death to carrie his heart to Jerusalem, that hee might bee discharged of his vow made to goe to the Holy-land. In memoriall whereof the Douglasses have inserted in their Coat of Armes a mans heart. From which time this family grew up to that power and greatnesse, and namely, after that King David the second had created William Earle of Douglasse, that they after a sort awed the Kings themselves. For at one time well neere there were sixe Earles of them, namely, of this Douglasse, of An∣gus, of Ormund, of Wigton, of Murray, and of Morton: among whom, the Earle of Wigton, through his martiall prowesse and desert, obtained at the hands of Charles the seventh king of France, the title of Duke of Tourain, and left the same to two Earles of Douglasse his heires after him. Above the confluence of Douglasse and Cluyd is Lanric, Sheriffdome o Lanric. the hereditarie Sheriffdom of the Hamiltons, who for their name are beholden unto Hamilton castle, which stan∣deth somewhat higher upon Cluyds banke, in a fruitfull and passing pleasant place; but they referre their originall, as they have a tradition, to a certaine Englishman surnamed Hampton, who having taken part with Robert Brus, received from him faire lands in this tract. Much increase of their wealth and estate came by the bounteous hand of King James the third, who bestowed in marriage upon Sir James Hamilton his own eldest sister, whom he had taken perforce from the Lord Boide her husband, together with the Earledome of Arran ; but of honours and dignities by the States of the kingdome, who after the death of King James the fifth, ordained James Hamil∣ton grandsonne to the former James, Regent of Scotland, whom Henrie also the se∣cond, King of France, advanced to be Duke of Chasteau Herald in Poictou: as also by King James the sixth, Marquesse H ∣milton. who honoured his son John with the title of Marquesse of Ha∣milton, which honourable title was then first brought into Scotland. The river Glotta or Cluyd runneth from Hamilton by Bothwell, which glorieth in the Earles thereof, Earles of Bot¦well. namely, John Ramsey, whose greatnesse with King James the third was excessive, but pernicious both to himselfe and the King: and the Hepburns, whom I have already spoken of, & so streight forward with a readie stream through Glascow, in ancient times past a Bishops seat: but discontinued a great while, untill that King William restored it up againe: but now it is an Archbishops See, and an Universitie, which Bishop Turnbull, after hee had in a pious and religious intent built a colledge in the yeere 1554. first founded. This Glascow is the most famous town of merchandise in this tract: for pleasant site, and apple trees, and other like fruit trees much commended, having also a verie faire bridge supported with eight arches. Of which towne I. Ionstoun thus versified. Non te Pontificum luxus, non Insula tantùm Ornavit, diri quae tibi caussa mali. Glottiadae quantùm decorant te, Glascua, Musae, Quae celsum attollunt clara sub astra caput. GLOTTA decus rerum, piscosis nobilis undis, Finitimi recreat jugera laeta soli. Ast Glottae decus, & vicinis gloria terris Glascua foe cundat flumine cuncta suo. The sumptuous port of Bishops great hath not adorn'd thee so, Nor mitre rich, that hath beene cause of thine accursed woe, As Cluyds Muses grace thee now, O Glascow towne: for why? They make thee beare thy head aloft up to the starrie skie. Cluyd the beautie of the world, for fishfull streame renown'd, Refresheth all the neighbour fields that lye about it round: But Glascow beautie is to Cluyd, and grace to countries nye, And by the streames that flow from thence, all places fructifie. Reinfraw Ba∣ronie. Along the hithermore banke of Cluid yeth the Baronie of Reinfraw, so called of the principall towne, which may seeme to bee RANDVARA in Ptolomee, by the river Cathcart, that hath the Baron of Cathcart dwelling upon it, carrying the same sur∣name, and of ancient nobilitie: neere unto which (for this little province can shew a goodly breed of nobilitie) there border Cruikston, the seat in times past of the Lords of Darley, from whom by right of marriage it came to the Earles of Lennox, whence Henrie the Father of King James the sixth was called Lord Darly; Halkead, the ha∣bitation of the Barons of Ros, Barons de Ros. descended originally from English blood, as who fetch their pedegree from that Robert Ros of Warke, who long since left England, and came under the alleageance of the King of Scots: Pasley. Pasley, sometimes a famous Monasterie founded by Alexander the second of that name, high Steward of Scotland, which for a gorgeous Church, and rich furniture was inferiour to few: but now, by the be∣neficiall favour of King James the sixth, it yeeldeth both dwelling place, and title of Baron to Lord Claud Hamilton, a younger sonne of Duke Chasteu Herald: and Sem∣pill, the Lord whereof Baron Sempill, Baron Sempill. by ancient right is Sheriffe of this Baronie. But the title of Baron of Reinfraw, by a peculiar priviledge doth appertaine unto the Prince of Scotland. LENNOX. A Long the other banke of Cluyd above Glascow, runneth forth Le∣vinia or LENNOX Northward, among a number of hills close couched one by another, having that name of the river Levin, which Ptolomee calleth LELANONIUS, and runneth into Cluyd out of Logh Lomund, which spreadeth it selfe here under the mountaines twenty miles long and eight miles broad, passing well stored with varietie of fish: but most especially with a pecu∣liar fish that is to be found no where else (they call it Pollac ) as also with Ilands, con∣cerning which manie fables have beene forged, and those ri e among the common people. As touching an Iland here that floateth and waveth too and fro, I list not to make question thereof. For what should let, but that a lighter bodie, and spongeous with∣all in manner of a pumice stone, may swimme above the water? and Plinie writeth, how in the Lake Vadimon there be Ilands full of grasse, and covered over with rushes and reeds, that float up and downe. But I leave it unto them that dwell neerer unto this place, and better know the nature of this Lake, whether this old Distichon of our Necham be true or no: Ditatur fluviis Albania, saxea ligna Dat Lomund multa frigiditate potens. With rivers Scotland is enrich'd, and Lomund there a Lake So cold of nature is, that stickes it quickly stones doth make. Round about the edge of this Lake there bee fishers cottages, but nothing else memorable, unlesse it be Kilmoronoc, a proper fine house of the Earles of Cassiles on the East side of it, which hath a most pleasant prospect into the said Lake. But at the confluence where Levin emptieth it selfe out of the Lake into Cluyd, stand∣eth the old Citie called Al-Cluyd. Al-Cluyd. Bede noteth that it signified (in whose lan∣guage I know not) as much as The rocke Cluyd. True it is, that Ar-Cluyd signifieth in the British tongue, upon Cluyd, or upon the rocke ; and Cluyd in ancient English sounded the same that a Rocke. The succeeding posteritie called this place Dunbritton, Dunbritton. Britannodu∣num. that is, The Britans towne (and corruptly by a certaine transposi∣tion of letters, Dunbarton ) because the Britans held it longest against the Scots, Picts, and Saxons. For it is the strongest of all the castles in Scotland by naturall situ∣ation, towring upon a rough, craggie, and two-headed rocke, at the verie meeting of the rivers in a greene plaine. In one of the tops or heads abovesaid, there standeth up a loftie watch-tower or Keep: on the other, which is the lower, there are sundrie strong bulwarks. Betweene these two tops on the North side, it hath one onely as∣cent, by which hardly one by one can passe up, and that with a labour by grees or steps, cut out aslope travers the rocke. In steed of ditches, on the West side serveth the river Levin ; on the South, Cluyd ; and on the East a boggie flat, which at everie tide is wholly covered over with waters; and on the North side the verie upright steepenesse of the place is a most sufficient defence. Certain remaines of the Britans, presuming of the naturall strength of this place, and their owne manhood, who, as Gildas writeth, gat themselves a place of refuge in high mountaines and hills, steep and naturally fensed, as it were, with rampires and ditches, in most thick woods and forrests, in rockes also of the sea, stood out and defended themselves here, after the Romans de∣parture, for three hundred yeeres, in the midst of their enemies. For in Bedes time, as himself writeth, it was the best fortified citie of the Britans. But in the yeere 756. Eadbert King of Northumberland, and Oeng King of the Picts, with their joint for∣ces enclosed it round about by siege, R. Hoveden. and brought it to such a desperate extremitie, that it was rendred unto them by composition. Of this place the territorie round about it is called the Sherifdome of Dunbarton, and hath had the Earles of Lennox this long time for their Sheriffes, by birth-right and inheritance. As touching the Earles of Lennox themselves, Earles of Len∣nox. to omit those of more ancient and obscure times, there was one Duncane Earle of Lennox in the reigne of Robert the second, who died and left none but daughters behinde him. Of whom one was married to Alan Steward, Steward. descended from Robert, a younger sonne of Wal∣ter the second of that name, High Steward of Scotland; and brother likewise to Alexander Steward the second, from whom the noblest and royall race of Scotland hath beene propagated. This surname Steward was given unto that most noble family, in regard of the honourable office of the Stewardshippe of the kingdome, as who had the charge of the Kings revenues. The said Alan had issue John Earle of Lennox, A troupe of Scots in France. and Robert, Captain of that companie of Scottishmen at Armes, which Charles the sixth K. of France first instituted, in lieu of some recom∣pence unto the Scottish nation, which by their valour had deserved passing well of the kingdom of France; who also by the same Prince for his vertues sake was endow∣ed with the Seigniorie of Aubigny in Auvergne. John had a sonne named Matthew Earle of Lennox, who wedded the daughter of James Hamilton by Marion daugh∣ter to King James the second; on whom he begat John Earle of Lennox: hee taking armes to deliver King James the fifth out of the hands of the Douglasses and the Ha∣miltons, was slaine by the Earle of Arran his Unkle on the mothers side. This John was father to Matthew Earle of Lennox, who having sustained sundrie troubles in France and Scotland, found fortune more friendly to him in England, through the favour of King Henrie the eighth, considering that hee bestowed upon him in mar∣riage his Neice, with faire lands. By the meanes of this happie marriage were brought into the world Henrie and Charles. Henrie, James King of Britaine. by Marie Queene of Scots, had issue JAMES the sixth, King of Britain, by the propitious grace of the eternall God, borne in a most auspicate and lucky houre, to knit and unite in one bodie of an Empire the whole Island of Britaine, divided as well in it selfe, as it was heretofore from the rest of the world, and (as we hope and pray) to lay a most sure foundation of an everlasting securitie, for our heires and the posteritie. As for Charles, he had issue one onely daughter Arbella, who above her sexe hath so embraced the studies of the best literature, that therein shee hath pro∣fited and proceeded with singular commendation, and is comparable with the ex∣cellent Ladies of old time. When Charles was dead, after that the Earledome of Lennox, whereof he stood enfeoffed, was revoked by Parliamentarie authoritie in the yeere of our Lord 1579. and his Unkle by the fathers side, Robert Bishop of Ca∣thanes, had some while enjoyed this title (in lieu whereof he received at the Kings hands the honour of the Earle of March) King James the sixth conferred the honou∣rable title of Duke of Lennox upon Esme Steward, sonne to John Lord D'Aubigny, younger brother to Mathew aforesaid Earle of Lennox, which Lodowic Esme his son at this day honourably enjoieth. Lords of Au∣bigny or O∣bigny. For since the time of Charles the sixth, there were of this line Lords of Aubigny in France, the said Robert before named, and Ber∣nard or Eberard under Charles the eighth & Lewis the twelfth, who is commended with great praise unto posteritie by P. Iovius, for his noble acts most valerously ex∣ploited in the warre of Naples, a most firme and trustie companion of King Henrie the seventh when he entred into England. Who used for his Emprese or devise, a Li∣on betweene buckles, with this Mot, DISTANTIA JUNGIT: for that by his meanes the Kingdomes of France and of Scotland, severed and dis-joined so farre in distance, were by a straighter league of friendship conjoyned: like as Robert Steward Lord D'Aubigny of the same race, Paradine. who was Marshall of France under King Lewis the ele∣venth, for the same cause used the royall Armes of France, with buckles Or in a bor∣der Gueules: which the Earles and Dukes of Lennox have ever since borne quarterly with the Armes of Steward. STIRLING Sheriffdome. U Pon Lennox North-eastward bordereth the territorie of STERLING, so named of the principall towne therein: for fruitfull soile, and numbers of Gentlemen in it, second to no province of Scotland. Here is that nar∣row land or streight, by which Dunbritton Frith and Edenborrough Frith (that I may use the termes of this our age) piercing farre into the land out of the West and East Seas, are divided asunder, that they meet not the one with the other. Which thing Iulius Agricola, who marched hitherto and beyond, first observed; and fortified this space betweene with garrisons, so as all the part of Britaine in this side was then in possession of the Romans, and the enemies removed and driven, as it were, into another Island, in so much as Tacitus judged right truely, There was no other bound or limit of Britaine to bee sought for. Neither verily in the time ensuing, did either the VALOUR of Armies, or the GLORIE of the Romane name, which scarcely could be stayed, set out the marches of the Empire in this part of the world farther, although with in odes they other whiles molested and endammaged them. But after this glorious expedition of Agricola, when himselfe was called backe, Bri∣taine, as faith Tacitus, became for-let, neither was the possession kept still thus farre: for the Caledonian Britans drave the Romans backe as farre as to the river Tine: in so much as Hadrian, who came into Britaine in person about the fortieth yeere after, and reformed many things in it, went no farther forward, but gave commandement that the GOD TERMINUS, God Termi∣nus. which was wont to give ground unto none, should retire backward out of this place, like as in the East on this side Euphrates. Hence it is that S. Augustine wrote in this wise: Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 4. c. 29. God TERMINUS, who gave not place to Iupiter, yeel∣ded unto the will of Hadrianus, yeelded to the rashnesse of Iulian, yeelded to the necessi∣tie of Iovian. In so much as Hadrian had enough to doe, for to make a wall of turfe between the rivers Tine and Esk, well neere an hundred miles Southward on this side Edenborrough Frith. But Antoninus Pius, who being adopted by Hadrian bare his name, stiled thereup∣on TITUS AELIUS HADRIANUS ANTONINUS PIUS, under the conduct of Lollius Urbicus, The wall of Antoninus Pi∣us. whom he had sent hither Lievtenant, repelled the Northern enemies backe againe beyond BODOTRIA, or Edenborrough Forth, and that by raising ano∣ther wall of turfe, namely, besides that of Hadrianus, as Capitolinus writeth. Which wall, that it was reared in this verie place whereof I now speake, and not by Severus (as it is commonly thought) I will produce no other witnesses, than two ancient In∣scriptions digged up here: of which the one fastned in the wall of an house at Cader, sheweth how the second Legion Augusta, set up the wall for the space of three miles and more: the other, now in the house of the Earle Marshall at Dunotyr, which implieth, that a band of the twentieth Legion Victrix raised the said wall three miles long. But see here the verie inscriptions themselves, as Servatius Riheley, a Gentleman of Silesia, who curiously travailed these countries, copied them out for mee. IMP. CAESARI T. AELIO HADRI∣ANO ANTONINO. AUG. PIO. P. P. VEXILLATIO LEG. XX. VAL. VIC. F. PER. MIL. P. III. IMP. CAES. TIT.—IO AELIO HADRIANO ANTON. AUG. PIO. PP. LEG. II. AUG. PER. M. P. III. D. CIXVIS. At Cadir, where this latter inscription is extant, there is another stone also erected by the second Legion Augusta, wherein within a Laurell garland, supported by two little images resembling victorie, are these letters. LEG. II AVG. FEC. And in a village called Miniabruch, out of a Ministers house there was removed this inscription into a Gentlemans house, which is there new built out of the ground: D. M. C. JULI. MARCELLINI PRAEF. Cohors pri∣ma Hamiorum. COH. I. HAMIOR: But when the Northerne nations in the reigne of Commodus, having passed once over this wall, had made much wast and spoile in the countrey, the Emperour Seve∣rus, as I have alreadie said, repaired this wall of Hadrian. Howbeit afterwards the Ro∣mans brought eftsoones the countrey lying betweene, under their subjection. For Ninius hath recorded, that Carausius under Diocletian strengthened this wall ano∣ther time, and fortified it with seven castles. Lastly, the Romanes fensed this place (when Theodosius the younger was Emperour) under the conduct of Gallio of Raven∣na. Now, saith Bede, they made a turfe wall, rearing it not so much with stone as with turfes (as having no canning Artificer for so great a piece of worke) and the same to no use, betweene two Friths or Armes of the sea, for many miles in length: that where the fense of water was wanting, there by the helpe of a wall they might defend their borders from the invasion of enemies: of which worke, that is to say, a very broad and high wall, a man may see to this day most certaine and evident remaines. This wall began, as the Scots in these dayes give out, at the river Aven, that go∣eth into Edenborrough Forth, Ninius. and having passed over the riveret Carron, reacheth unto Dunbritton. But Bede, as I said erewhile, affirmeth that it beginneth in a place called Pen vaell, that is, in the Picts language, as much as The head of the wall ; in the Britans tongue Pen-Gual, in English Penwalton, in Scottish Cevall: all which names no doubt are derived from Vallum in Latine: and he saith, That place is almost two miles from Abereurvig or Abercurving. Abercorn. And it endeth, as the common sort thinke, at Kirk-Patricke, the native soile (as some writeth) of Saint Patrick the Irish-mens Apostle, neere unto Cluyd ; according to Bede, at Alcluid ; after Ninius, at the Citie Pen Alcloyt, which may seeme all one. Grahams dyke. Now this wall is commonly called Grahams dyke ; either of Graham a warlike Scot, whose valour was especially seene when the breach was made through it, or else of the hill Grampie, at the foot whereof it stood. The author of Rota Tempo∣rum calleth it the wall of Aber-corneth, that is, of the mouth of the river Corneth: where, in Bedes time, there was a famous monasterie standing, as he hath recorded, up∣on English ground, but neere unto that frith or arme of the sea, which in those daies seve∣red the lands of the English and the Picts. Hard by this wall of turfe, what way as the river Carron crosseth this Sheriffdome of Sterling, toward the left hand are seene two mounts cast up by mans hand, which they call Duni pacis, Duni pacis. that is, Knolles of peace: and almost two miles lower there is an ancient round building, foure and twentie cubits high, and thirteene broad, open in the top, framed of rough stone without lime, having the upper part of everie stone so tenanted into the nether, as that the whole worke still rising narrow, by a mutuall interlacing and clasping, upholdeth it selfe. Some call this the Temple of God TERMINUS, Arthurs oven. others Arthurs-Oven, who father everie stately and sumptuous thing upon Arthur. Others againe, Iulius Hoff, and suppose it to have been built by Iulius Caesar. But I would think rather that Iulius Agricola built it, who fortified this fron∣tier part, were it not that Ninius hath already enformed us, that it was erected by Carausius for a triumphall Arch. For hee, as Ninius writeth, built upon the banke of Caron, a round house of polished stone, erecting a Triumphall Arch in memoriall of a victorie: hee ree-dified also the wall, and strengthened it with seven Castles. In the middest space betweene Duni pacis and this building, on the right∣hand-banke of Carron, there is yet to be discerned a confused face of a little ancient Citie: where the vulgar people beleeveth there was sometimes a road for ships, who call it Camelot, by a name that is rife in King Arthurs booke; and they contend, but all in vaine, to have it that Camalodunum which Tacitus mentioneth. But it would seeme rather, by the name of the river Carron running underneath, to have beene CORTA DAMNIORUM, Coria Damni∣orum. which Ptolomee mentioneth in this tract. And now take with you that which George Buchanan, that excellent Poet, wrote of the limit of the Roman Empire at Carron. Roma securigeris praetendit maenia Scotis, Hîc spe progressus positâ, Carronis ad undam Terminus Ausonii signat divertia regni. 'Gainst warlike Scots with axes arm'd, a mightie frontier wall The Romans rais'd: and limit there, which TERMINUS they call, Neere Carron streame, now past all hope more British ground to gaine, Markes out the Roman Empires end, whence they to turne were faine. In this territorie of Sterling on the East side, Callendar. Barons Le∣vingston. there sheweth it selfe Castle Callendar, belonging to the Barons of Levingston ; and the family of the Barons Fleming dwel∣leth hard by at Cumbernald, which they received at the hands of King Robert Brus, for their service valiantly & faithfully performed in defence of their country: where∣by also they attained unto the hereditarie honour to be Chamberlaines of Scotland. And even very lately the favour of King James the Sixth hath honoured this house with the title of Earle, Fleming Earle of Wigton. what time as he created I. Baron Fleming Earle of Wigton. In a place neere adjoining standeth Elpheingston, which likewise hath his Barons, advan∣ced to that dignitie by King James the fourth: And where Forth full of his windings and crooked crankes runneth downe with a rolling pace, and hath a bridge over him, standeth Sterlin, commonly called Strivelin, and Sterlin Burrough ; where on the very brow of a steepe rocke there is mounted on high a passing strong Castle of the Kings, which King James the sixth hath beautified with new buildings, and where∣of this long time the Lords of Ereskin have been Captaines, unto whom the charge and tuition of the Princes of Scotland during their minoritie hath been otherwhiles committed. Whereas some there be, that would have the good and lawfull money of England, Sterling mony▪ which is called Sterling money, to take the name from hence, they are much deceived: for that denomination came from the Germans, of their Easterly dwelling termed by Englishmen Esterlings ; whom King John of England first sent for to re∣duce the silver to the due finenesse and puritie: and such monies in ancient writing are ever more found by the name of Esterling. But concerning Sterlin towne the verses that I. Jonston hath made shall supply all the rest. Regia sublimis celsa despectat ab arce Pendula sub biferis maenia structa jugis. Regum augusta parens, Regum nutricula natis, Hinc sibi Regifico nomine tota placet. Hospita sed cuivis quovis sub nomine, amicus Sive es, seu non es, hospes an hostis item. Pro lucro cedit damnum. Discordia tristis Heu quoties procerum sanguine tinxit humum? Hoc uno infelix, at felix coetera, nusquam Laetior aut caelifrons, geniusve soli. A regall palace stately set, beholds from mount aloft, Towne wall, built hanging on the side of hill with double cost. The sacred mother unto Kings, of Kings babes eke the nource, Hence is it that she prides her selfe in Kings names and no worse. But entertaineth every one, by name it skils not what, A friend or foe, friend guest or no, she reckneth nought of that. In steed of gaine this turnes to losse. Besides, how oft alas, Hath discord foule with Nobles blood stain'd hence both ground and grasse? In this alone unhappie she, else not; nor shall ye finde, Else where the aire more mild and cleere, or soile of better kinde. Banocbourn. About two miles hence the Banoc-bourn runneth between exceeding high banks on both sides, and with a verie swift streame in winter, toward the Forth: a bourn most famous for as glorious a victorie as ever the Scots had, what time as Edward the se∣cond King of England was put to flight, who was fain to make hard shift, and in great hast and feare to take a boat and save his life: yea and the most puissant armie which England had before sent out, was discomfited through the valiant prowesse of King Robert Brus ; insomuch as for two yeeres after the English came not into the field a∣gainst the Scots. Alauna. About Sterlin Ptolomee seemeth to place ALAUNA, which is either neere the little river Alon, that here entreth into the Forth ; or else by Alway, an house of the Ereskins, who by inheritance are the Sheriffes of all this territorie without the Burgh. But I have not yet read of any one dignified by the title of Earle of Sterlin. CALEDONIA. W Hat soever part of Britain lieth Northward beyond Grahames Dyke, or the wall of Antoninus Pius before named, and beareth out on both seas, is called by Tacitus CALEDONIA, like as the people thereof, Britans inhabiting CALEDONIA. Ptolomee divi∣deth them into many nations, as CALEDONII, EPIDII, VACO∣MAGI, &c. who were all of them afterward, for continuing their ancient manner and custome of painting their bodies, named by the Romans and the Provinciall people, PICTS: divided by Ammianus Marcellinus into two nations, the DICALEDONES and VECTURIONES, touching whom I have spoken already before. Howbeit in the approved and best writers they goe all under the name of Caledonians: whom I would think to have beene so called of Ka∣led, a British word that signifieth Hard, and in the plurall number maketh Kaledion: whence the word Caledonii may be derived, that is to say, hard, rough, uncivill, and a wilder kind of people, such as the Northren nations for the most part are: who by rea∣son of the rigorous cold of the aire, are more rough and fierce, and for their abun∣dance of blood more bold and adventurous. Moreover, beside the position of the climate, this is furthered by the nature and condition of the soile, which riseth up all throughout with rough and rugged mountaines: and mountainers verily all men know and confesse to be hardie, stout, and strong. But whereas Varro alledgeth out of Pacuvius, that Caledonia breedeth and nourisheth men of exceeding bigge bodies, I would understand the place rather of Caledonia the region of Epirus, than this of ours; although ours also may justly challenge unto it selfe this commendation. A∣mong this was the Wood CALEDONIA, Caledon for∣rest. tearmed by Lucius Florus, Salius Caledonius, that is, the forrest of Caledonia, spreading out a mightie way, and impassable by rea∣son of tall trees standing so thicke, divided also by Grampe hill, now called Grantz∣baine, that is, Ulysses his Altar. the crooked bending mountaine. That Ulysses arrived in Caledonia (saith Solinus) appeareth plainly by a votive altar with an inscription in Greek letters ; but I would judge it to have been rather erected to the honour of Ulysses, than reared by Ulysses himselfe. Caledonian Beares. Martiall the Poet likewise in this verse maketh mention of Cale∣donian beares. Nuda Caledonio sic pectora praebuit urso. Thus yeelded he his naked brest To beare of Caledon forrest. Plutarch also hath written, that Beares were brought out of Britaine to Rome, and had there in great admiration; whereas notwithstanding Britaine for these ma∣ny ages past hath bred none. What Caledonian monster that should bee, whereof Claudian wrote thus, —Caledonio velata Britannia monstro, With monster Caledonian Britaine all attired, to tell you truth, Caledonian buls. I know not. Certes, it nourished in times past a number of white wilde buls, with thicke manes in manner of Lions (but in these dayes few) and those verie cruell, fierce, and so hatefull of mankinde, that for a certaine time they abhorre whatsoever they had either handled or breathed upon: yea, they utterly scorne the forcible strength of dogges; albeit Rome in times past wondered so much at the fiercenesse of Scottish dogges, that it was thought there, they were brought thither within yron grates and cages. Well, this tearme and name CALEDONII grew so rife with Roman writers, that they used it for all Britaine, and for all woods of Bri∣taine whatsoever. Hereupon L. Florus writeth, that Caesar followed the Britans un∣to the Caledonian woods, and yet he never saw them in his life: Hence also Valerius Flaccus writeth thus to Vespasian the Emperour, —Caledonius postquam tua carbasa vexit Oceanus: that is, the British Ocean. Hence likewise it is that Statius versified thus unto Crispinus, sonne of Vectius Vola∣nus Propretour of Britaine about the time of Vitellius. Quanta Caledonios attollet gloria campos, Cùm tibi long aevus referet trucis incola terrae? Hîc suetus dare jura parens, hoc cespite turmas Affari, ille dedit, cinxitque baec moenia fossâ: Belligeris haec dona deis, haec tela dicavit, Cernis adhuc titulos: hunc ipse vacantibus armis Induit, hunc regi rapuit thoraca Britanno. How much renowned shall the fields of Caledonia bee, When as some old inhabitant of that fierce land to thee Shall in these tearmes report and say? Behold, thy father oft Was wont in judgement here to sit: upon this banke aloft To th'armed troups to speak; also 'twas he that wall'd this fort, That built thus strong, and it with ditch entrenched in this sort. By him to gods of warre these gifts and armes were consecrate, The titles (lo) are extant yet; himselfe this brave brest-plate In time of battaile did put on, this cuirace, finally, In fight he pluckt by force of armes from King of Britannie. But in these, as in other things, I may say, Crescit in immensum facunda licentia vatum. Poeticall licence is boundlesse. For neither Caesar, nor Volanus so much as ever knew the Caledonians. In Plinies time, as himselfe witnesseth, thirtie yeeres almost after Claudius, the Romanes with all their warlike expeditions, had discovered no farther in Britaine than to the vici∣nitie of the Caledonian wood. For Iulius Agricola under Domitian, was the first that entred Caledonia: Galgacus the Britan. whereof at that present Galgac was Prince (who is named Galauc ap Liennauc in the book of Triadum. Triplicites, among the three worthies of Britain) a man of a mightie spirit and stout stomack: who having put to flight the ninth Legion, in exceeding heat of courage joyned battaile with the Romans, and most manfully de∣fended his country so long, untill fortune rather than his owne valour failed him. For then, as he saith, These Northern Britans, beyond whom there was no land, and beside whom none were free, were the utmost nation verily of this Iland, like as Catullus cal∣led the Britans the utmost of all the world, in that verse unto Furius. Caesaris visens monumenta magni, Gallicum Rhenum, horribiles & ulti∣mosque Britannos. Great Caesars monuments to see in his memoriall, The Rhene in Gaul, and Britans grim, the farthest men of all. Argetecoxus. In the daies of Severus, as we read in Xiphilinus, Argetecox a pettie Prince reigned over this tract; whose wife being rated and reviled as an adulteresse by Iulia the Em∣presse, frankly and boldly made this answer: We Britaine Dames have to doe with the bravest and best men, and you Roman Ladies with everie leud base companion secretly. FIFE. Clarkmans. I N this large countrey of the Caledonians, beyond the Ter∣ritorie of Sterlin, whereof I wrote last, and two countries or Sheriffedomes of lesse note, Clackmans, over which a Knight named de Carsse ; and Kinros, over which the Earle of Morton are Sheriffes, FIFE, a most goodly Bi∣land, wedged, as it were, betweene the two Armes of the Sea, Forth and Tau, shooteth out farre into the East. This land yeeldeth plentie of corne and forage, yea and of pit coales: the sea, besides other fishes, affordeth Oisters and Shell-fish in great abundance: and the coasts are well bespred with prettie townlets, replenished with stout and lustie mariners. In the South side hereof by Forth, first appeareth Westward Cul-ros, which giveth the title of a Baronie to Sir I. Colvill: then standeth Dunfermling, Dunfermling. a famous monasterie in old time, both the building and buriall place of King Malcolm the third. But now it giveth both name and honour of an Earle unto Sir Alexander Seton a most prudent Counsellor, whom lately James King of great Britain worthily raised from Baron of Fivie to be Earle of Dunferm∣ling, Earle of Dun∣fermling. Earle of King∣horn. and Lord Chancellour of the realme of Scotland. Then Kinghorne standeth hard upon the Forth, from which place Sir Patrick Lion, Baron Glamys, lately recei∣ved at the bountifull hand of King James the sixth the title and honour of an Earle. After this, Disert. there is upon the shore Disert, situate on the rising of an hill, from whence there lieth an open Heath of the same name, where there is a good large place which they call the Cole-plot, that hath great plentie of an earthie Bitumen, and part∣ly burneth, to some damage of the inhabitants. Unto it adjoineth Ravins-Heuch, as one would say, The steepe hill of Ravens, the habitation of the Barons Seincler. A∣bove it the river Levin hideth himselfe in the Forth: River Levin. which river running out of the Lake Levin, wherein standeth a Castle of the Douglasses now Earles of Morton, hath at the verie mouth of it Wemmis Castle, Wemmis. the seat of a noble family, bearing the same surname: which King James the sixth hath of late honoured with the dignity of a Ba∣ron. From hence the shore draweth backe with a crooked and winding tract unto Fif-nesse, Saint Andrews. Saint Regulus. that is, The Promontorie or Nose of Fife. Above it Saint Andrews an Archie∣piscopall Citie hath a faire prospect into the open maine sea. The more ancient name of the place, as old memorials witnesse, was Regimund, that is, Saint Regulus mount: in which we read thus, Oeng or Ung King of the Picts, granted unto God and Saint Andrew, that it should be the chiefe and mother of all Churches in the Picts King∣dome. Afterward there was placed here an Episcopall See, the Bishops whereof, like as all the rest within the Kingdome of Scotland, were consecrated by the Archbi∣shop of Yorke, untill at the intercession of King James the third, by reason of so ma∣ny warres betweene the Scottish and Englishmen, Pope Sixtus the fourth ordained the Bishop of Saint Andrewes to be Primate and Metropolitane of all Scotland; and Pope Innocentius the eighth bound him and his successours to the imitation and pre∣cedent of the Metropolitane of Canterburie, Ex Camera A∣postolica lib. 24. fol. 24. in these words: That in matters concer∣ning the Archiepiscopall state, they should observe and firmely hold the offices, droits, and rights of Primacie, and such like Legacie, and the free exercise thereof, the honours, charges, and profits: and that they should endevour to performe inviolably the laudable customes of the famous Metropolitane Church of Canterburie, the Arch-bishop whereof is Legatus natus of the Kingdome of England, &c. Howbeit before that, Laurence Lundoris and Richard Corvel, Doctors of the Civill law, publikely professed here good literature, laid the foundation of an Universitie: which now, for happie en∣crease of learned men, for three Colledges and the Kings Professours in them, is be∣come highly renowned. In commendation whereof Master Ionston, the Kings Pro∣fessour there in Divinitie, hath made these verses. FANUM REGULI, SIVE ANDREAPOLIS. Imminet Oceano paribus descripta viarum Limitibus, pingui quàm benè septa solo! Magnificis opibus, staret dum gloria prisca Pontificum, hîc fulsit Pontificalis apex. Musarum ostentat surrecta palatia coelo, Delicias hominum, deliciasque Deûm. Hîc nemus umbriferum Phoebi, Nymphaeque sorores, Candida quas inter praesitet Uranie. Quae me longinquis redeuntem Teutonis oris Suscipit, excelso collocat inque gradu. Urbs nimium felix, Musarum si bona nôsset Munera, & aetherei regna beata Dei. Pelle malas pestes urbe, & quae noxia Musis Alme Deus, coeant Pax pietásque simul. SAINT REGULUS, OR S. ANDREWS. Seated it is hard by the sea, at even and equall bounds Of streets, how well enclosed besides with fat and fertile grounds! Whilom, when Prelates state was great and glorious withall, There flourish'd here in sumptuous port a See Pontificall. Now Schooles it shewes and Colledges, both Gods and mans delight, To Muses which be dedicate, and built to stately height. Here Phaebus hath his shadie grove, here dwell the Sisters nine, And chiefe of them the Ladie bright, Uranie divine. Who when I was returned from farre coasts of Germanie, With welcome kinde here did me place in chaire of high degree. Most happie towne, wist it what were the gifts of learning true, The blessed Kingdome, if withall of God in heaven it knew. All plagues, good God, all nocive things to Muses hence repell, That in this Citie Godlinesse and Peace may jointly dwell. Hard by there loseth it selfe in the sea Eden or Ethan, a little river, which sprin∣ging up neere unto Falkland (belonging in times past to the Earles of Fife, Falkland. but now a retyring place of the Kings, verie well seated for hunting pleasures and disports) run∣neth under a continued ridge of hills, which divide this countrey in the midst, by Struthers (a place so called of a Reedplot ) a Castle of the Barons Lindsey ; Studer. and by Cupre, Cuper. a notable Burrough, where the Sheriffe sitteth to minister justice. Concerning which the same I. Ionston hath thus versified. CUPRUM FIFAE. ARVA inter nemorísque umbras & pascua laeta, Lenè fluens vitreis labitur Eden aquis. Hûc veniat si quis Gallorum â finibus hospes, Gallica se hîc iterum fortè videre putet. Anne etiam ingenium hinc & fervida pectora traxit? An potiùs patriis hauserit illa focis? By rich corne fields, by shadie woods and pastures fresh among, The river Eden glideth soft with chrystall streame along. Hither to come from coasts of France if any stranger chance, Here haply may he thinke he hath a sight againe of France. What? drew this place from thence their wit and spirit hot trow yee? Or rather had the same at first by native propertie? Now where the shore turneth inward a front Northward, hard by the salt water of Tau, there flourished in old time two goodly Abbyes, Balmerinoch, built by Queene Ermengard, wife to King William, daughter of Vicount Beaumont in France. But lately King James of great Britaine advanced Sir Iames Elphinston to the honour of Baron Balmerinoch: Balmerinoch. Lundoris. and Lundoris, founded among the woods by David Earle of Huntington, and at this day the Baronie of Sir Patrick Lesley: betweene which stan∣deth Banbrich, the habitation of the Earle of Rothes, strongly built castle wise. But as touching the townes of Fife planted along the sea side, have here now, if it please you, these verses of Master Ionston. Oppida sic toto sunt sparsa in littore ut unum Dixeris, inque uno plurima juncta eadem: Littore quot curvo Forthae volvuntur arenae, Quotque undis refluo tunditur orasalo. Penè tot hîc cernas instratum puppibus aequor, Urbibus & crebris penè tot ora hominum. Cuncta operis intenta domus, foeda otia nescit, Sedula cura domi, sedula curaforis. Quae maria, & quas non terras animosa juventus Ah! fragili fidens audet adire trabe? Auxit opes virtus, virtuti dura pericla Iuncta etiam lucro damna fuere suo. Quae fecêre viris animos, cultumque dedêre, Magnanimis prosunt damna, pericla, labor. Who sees how thicke townes stand upon this coast, will say anone, They are but one, and yet the same all joyned in that one. How many sands on crooked shore of Forth are cast by tides, Or billowes at the seas returne beat hard upon bankes sides. So many ships well neere you may here see to saile or ride, And in those townes so thicke, almost as many folke abide. In everie house they ply their worke, no idle drones they are: Busie at home with diligence, busie abroad with care. What seas or lands are there to which a voiage for to make, In brittle barkes will not their youth courageous undertake. By valour be they growne to wealth, yet valour meet with paines, And perils too; some losses too have they had with their gaines. These things have made them valiant, civill withall and courteous: Losse, perill, painfull toile availe all such as be magnanimous. The Governour of this province, like as of all the rest in this Kingdome, was in times past a Thane, that is, in the old English tongue, The Kings Minister: as it is also at this day in the Danish language: but Malcolm Canmore made Macduffe, who be∣fore was Thane of Fife, Earles of Fife. the first hereditarie Earle of Fife ; and in consideration of his good desert and singular service done unto him, granted that his posteritie should have the honour to place the King, when hee is to be crowned, in his chaire; to lead the Vant-guard in the Kings armie; and if any of them should happen by casualty to kill either Gentleman or Commoner, to buy it out with a peece of money. And not farre from Lundoris there is to bee seene a Crosse of stone, which standing for a li∣mit betweene Fife and Strathern, had an inscription of barbarous verses, and a cer∣tain priviledge of Sanctuarie, that any Man-slaier allied to Macduffe Earle of Fife within the ninth degree, if he came unto this Crosse, and gave nine kine with an Coplindas ▪ hei∣ er, should bee quit of manslaughter. When his posteritie lost this title I could never yet find: but it appeareth out of the Records of the kingdome, that K. David the se∣cond gave unto William Ramsey this Earldome, with all and everie the immunities and law which is called Clan-Mac-Duffe: and received it is for certaine, that the linage of the Wemesies and Douglasse, yea and that great kinred Clan-Hatan, the chiefe whereof is Mac-Intoskech, descended from them. And the most learned I. Skerne Clerke of the Kings Register of Scotland, hath taught mee in his significations of words, that Isabel daughter and heire to Duncane Earle of Fife, granted upon cer∣taine conditions unto Robert the third King of the Scots, for the use and behoofe of Robert Stewart Earle of Menteith, the Earldome of Fife: who being afterwards Duke of Albanie, and affecting the Kingdome, with cruell ambition caused David the Kings eldest son to be most pitifully famished to death, which is highest extremitie of all miserie. 1424. But his son Murdac suffered due punishment for the wickednesse both of his father, and his owne sonnes, being put to death by King James the first for their violent oppressions, and a decree passed, that the Earldome of Fife should be u∣nited unto the Crown for ever. But the authoritie of the Sheriffe of Fife belongeth in right of inheritance to the Earle of Rothes. Earles of Rothes. STRATHERN. A S farre as to the river Tau, which boundeth Fife on the North∣side, Iulius Agricola, the best Propretour of Britaine under Do∣mitian the worst Emperour, marched with victorious armes in the third yeere of his warlike expeditions, having wasted and spoiled the nations hitherto. Neere the out-let of Tau, the no∣table river Ern intermingleth his waters with Tau: The river Ern. which river beginning out of a Lake or Loch of the same name, bestoweth his owne name upon the countrey through which he runneth: For it is called Straith Ern, which in the ancient tongue of the Britans, signifieth the Vale along Ern. The banke of this Ern is beautified with Drimein Castle, belonging to the family of the Barons of Dromund, Barons of Dromund. advanced to highest honours ever since that King Robert Stew∣art the third took to him a wife out of that linage. For the women of this race have for their singular beautie and well favoured sweet countenance won the prize from all others, insomuch as they have beene the Kings most amiable paramours. Upon the same banke Tulibardin Castle sheweth it selfe aloft, Earles of Tuli∣bardin. but with greater jollitie, since that by the propitious favour of King James the sixth, Sir Iohn Murray Baron of Tu∣libardin, was raised to the honour and estate of Earle of Tulibardin. Upon the other bank, Duplin. Baron Oli∣phant. more beneath, Duplin Castle, the habitation of the Barons Oliphant, reporteth yet what an overthrow (the like to which was never before) the Englishmen that came to aide King Edward Balliol, gave there unto the Scots; insomuch as the English writers in that time doe write, that they won this victorie not by mans hand, but by the power of God: and the Scottish writers relate, how that out of the family of the Lindeseies there were slaine in the field fourescore persons, and that the name of the Haies had bin quite extinguished, but that the chiefe of that house left his wife be∣hind him great with child. Not farre from it standeth Innermeth, well knowne by reason of the Lords thereof, the Stewarts out of the family of Lorn. Inch-Chafra, that is in the old Scottish tongue, the Isle of Masses, hereby may bee remembred when as it was a most famous Abbey of the order of Saint Augustin, founded by the Earle of Strathern about the yeere 1200. When Ern hath joined his water with Tau in one streame, so that Tau is now be∣come more spatious, hee looketh up to Aberneth seated upon his banke, the royall seat in old time of the Picts, and a well peopled Citie: which, as we read in an anci∣ent fragment, Nectane King of the Picts gave unto God and S. Brigide untill the day of Doom, together with the bounds thereof, which lye from a stone in Abertrent, unto a stone nigh to Carfull, that is, Loghfoll, and from thence as farre as to Ethan. But long after it became the possession of the Douglasses Earles of Anguse, who are called Lords of Aberneth ; and there some of them lye enterred. Earles of Stra∣thern. Fines 35 H. 3. n. 1. The first Earle of Strathern, that I read of, was Malisse, who in the time of King Henrie the third of England married one of the heires of Robert Muschamp, a po∣tent Baron of England. Long afterward Robert Stewart, in the yeere 1380. Then, David a younger sonne of King Robert the second, whose onely daughter given in marriage to Patricke Graham begat Mailise or Melisse Graham, from whom King James the first tooke away the Earledome as escheated, after that he understood out of the Records of the Kingdome, that it was given unto his mothers grandfather, and the heires males of his bodie. This territorie, as also that of Menteith adjoining, the Barons Dromund governe hereditarily by Seneschals authority, as their Stewarties. Menteith Stewartie. Menteith hath the name of Teith, a river which also they call Taich, and thereof this little province they tearme in Latin Taichia ; upon the banke of which lieth the Bishopricke of Dunblan, Dunblan. which King David the first of that name erected. At Kirk∣bird, that is, Saint Brigids Church, the Earles of Menteith have their principall house, or Honour: as also the Earles of Montrosse comming from the same stocke, at Kin-Kardin not farre off. This Menteith reacheth, as I have heard, unto the mountaines that enclose the East side of the Logh or Lake Lomund. Earles of Men∣teith. The ancient Earles of Men∣teith were of the family of Cumen, which in times past being the most spred & migh∣tiest house of all Scotland, was ruinated with the over-weight and sway thereof: but the latter Earles were of the Grahams line, ever since that Sir Mailise Graham attai∣ned to the honour of an Earle. ARGATHELIA, OR ARGILE. B Eyond the Lake Lomund and the West part of Lennox, there spreadeth it selfe neere unto Dunbriton Forth the large countrey called Argathelia, & Argadia in Latin, but commonly ARGILE, more truely Argathel, and Ar-Gwithil, that is, Neere unto the I∣rish ; or, as old writings have it, The edge or border of Ireland: For it lyeth toward Ireland, the inhabitants whereof, the Bri∣tans tearme Gwithil and Gaothel. The countrey runneth out in length and breadth, all mangled with fishfull pooles, and in some places with ri∣sing mountaines, very commodious for feeding of cattell; in which also there range up and downe wilde kine and red Deere: but along the shore it is more unpleasant in sight, what with rockes, and what with blackish barraine mountaines. In this part, as Bede writeth, Britain received after the Britans and Picts, a third nation of Scots, in that countrey where the Picts inhabited: who comming out of Ireland under the leading of Reuda, either through friendship, or by dint of sword, planted here their seat amongst them, Dalreudin Dal. which they still hold. Of which their leader they are to this very day called Dal∣reudini: for in their language Dal signifieth (a part). And a little after, Ireland (saith hee) is the proper Countrey of the Scots, for, being departed out of it, they added unto the Britans and Picts a third nation in Britaine. And there is a very great Bay or arme of the sea, that in old time severed the nation of the Britans from the Picts, which from the West breaketh a great way into the land, where standeth the strongest Citie of all the Britans even to this day, called Alchith. In the North part of which Bay, the Scots a∣foresaid when they came, got themselves a place to inhabite. Of that name Dalreudin, no remaines at all, to my knowledge, are now extant; neither finde wee any thing thereof in Writers, Dalrieta▪ unlesse it bee the same that Dalrieta. For, in an old Pamphlet, touching the division of Albanie, Dalrea. wee read of one Kinnadie (who for certaine was a King of Scots, and subdued the Picts) these very words; Kinnadie two yeeres before hee came into Pictavia (for so it calleth the countrey of the Picts) entred upon the Kingdome of Dalrieta. Also in an historie of later time there is mention made of Dalrea in some place of this tract, where King Robert Brus fought a field unfortu∣nately. That Justice should be ministred unto this Province by Justices Itinerant at Perth, whensoever it pleased the King, King James the fourth by authoritie of the States of the Kingdome enacted a law. But the Earles themselves have in some cases their roi∣alties, as being men of very great command and authoritie, followed with a mightie traine of retainers and dependants: who derive their race from the ancient Princes and Potentates of Argile, by an infinite descent of Ancestours, and from their castle Cambell tooke their surname: but the honour and title of Earle was given unto them by King James the second, who, as it is recorded, invested Colin Lord Cambell, Earle of Argile, in regard of his owne vertue, and the worth of his family. Whose heires and successours standing in the gracious favour of the Kings, have bin Lords of Lorn, and a good while Generall Justices of the Kingdome of Scotland, Earles of A¦gile. or, as they use to speake, Iustices ordained in Generall, and Great Masters of the Kings royall house∣hold. CANTIRE. Logh Fin. L Ogh Fin, a lake breeding such store of herrings at a certaine due season, as it is wonderfull, severeth Argile from a Promontorie, which for thirtie miles together growing still toward a sharpe point, thrusteth it selfe forth with so great a desire toward Ire∣land (betwixt which and it there is a narrow sea, scarce thir∣teene miles over) as if it would conjoine it selfe. Ptolomee termeth this, Epidium. the Promontorie EPIDIORUM, betweene which name, and the Islands EBUDAE lying over against it, there is, in my conceit, some affinitie. At this day it is called in the Irish tongue (which they speake in all this tract) CAN-TYRE, that is, The lands Head ; inhabited by the Mac-Conells, a family that here swayeth much, howbeit at the pleasure and dispose of the Earle of Argile: yea and otherwhiles they make out their light pinnaces and gallies for Ireland, to raise booties and pillage, who also hold in possession those little provinces of Ireland, which they call Glines and Rowts. This Promontorie lyeth annexed to Knapdale by so thin a necke (as being scarce a mile broad, and the same all sandie) that the mariners finde it the neerer way to convey their small vessels over it by land. Plinius. Which I hope a man may sooner beleeve, than that the Argonauts laid their great ship Argos upon their shoulders, and so carried it along with them five hundred miles, from Aemonia unto the shores of Thessalia. LORN. S Omewhat higher toward the North lyeth LORN, bearing the best kinde of barley in great plentie, and divided with Leaue a vast and huge lake: Berogomum. by which standeth Berogomum a castle, in which sometime was kept the Court of Justice, or Session: and not farre from it Dunstafag, that is, Stephens Mount, the Kings house in times past: above which Logh Aber, a Lake in∣sinuating it selfe from out of the Westerne sea, windeth it selfe so farre within land, that it had conflowed together with Nesse, another Lake run∣ning into the East sea, but that certaine mountaines betweene kept them with a verie little partition asunder. The chiefest place of name in this tract is Tarbar in Logh Kinkeran, where King James the fourth ordained a Justice and Sheriffe, to admini∣ster justice unto the Inhabitants of the out Islands. These countries and those beyond them, 1503. Lib. 3. cap. 4. in the yeere of our Lords Incarnation 655. the Picts held: whom Bede cal∣leth the Northern Picts, where hee reporteth, that in the said yeere Columbane a Priest and Abbat, famous for his Monkish profession and life, came out of Ireland into Britaine, to instruct these in Christian religion, that by meanes of the high rough ridges of the mountaines were sequestred from the Southerne countries of the Picts: and that they, in lieu of a reward, allowed unto him the Iland Hii, over against them, now called I-Comb-Kill, of which more in place convenient. The Lords of Lorna in the age aforegoing were the Stewarts: but now, by reason of a female their heire, the Earles of Argile ; who use this title in their honourable stile. BRAID ALBIN, or ALBANY. M Ore inwardly, where the uninhabitable, loftie, and rugged ridges of the Mountaine Grampius begin a little to slope and settle downeward, Albanie. is seated BRAID-ALBIN, that is, The highest part of Scotland: for they that are the true and right Scots indeed, call Scotland in their mother tongue Albin ; like as that part where it mounteth up highest, Drum Albin, that is, the Ridge of Scotland. But in an old booke it is read Brun Albin, where wee finde this written: Fergus filius Eric, &c. that is, Fergus the sonne of Eric was the first of the seed or line of Chonare, that entred upon the Kingdome of Albanie, from Brun-Albain unto the Irish sea and Inch-Gall. And after him the Kings descended from the seed or race of Fergus reigned in Brun-Albain or Brunhere unto Alpin the sonne of Eochall. But this Albanie is better knowne for the Dukes thereof, Dukes of Al∣banie. than for any good gifts that the soile yeeldeth. The first Duke of Albanie that I read of, was Robert Earle of Fife, whom his brother King Robert the third of that name advanced to that ho∣nour: yet he (ungratefull person that he was) pricked on with the spirit of ambition, famished to death his sonne David, that was heire to the crown. But the punishment due for this wicked fact, which himselfe by the long-sufferance of God felt not, his son Mordac, the second Duke of Albanie, suffered most grievously, being condemned for treason and beheaded, when hee had seene his two sonnes the day before execu∣ted in the same manner. The third Duke of Albanie was Alexander, second sonne to King James the second, who being Regent of the Kingdome, Earle of March, Marr, and Garioth, Lord of Annandale and of Man, was by his own brother, King James the third outlawed, and after hee had beene turmoiled with many troubles, in the end, as hee stood by to behold a Justs and Tourneament in Paris, chanced to bee woun∣ded with a peece of a shattered launce, and so died. His sonne John, the fourth Duke of Albanie, Regent likewise and made Tutour to King James the fifth, taking contentment in the pleasant delights of the French Court, after hee had wedded there the daughter, and one of the heires of John Earle of Auverne and Lauragveze, died there without issue: Whom in a respective reverence to the bloud royall of the Scots, Francis the first King of France gave thus much honour unto, as that hee allowed him place betweene the Archbishop of Langres, Tillet. and the Duke of Alenson, Peeres of France. After his death there was no Duke of Albanie untill that Queene Marie in our memorie conferred this title upon Henrie Lord Darly, whom within some few daies after shee made her husband, like as King James the sixth granted the same unto his owne second sonne Charles being an Infant, who is now Duke of Yorke. There inhabite these regions a kinde of people, rude, warlike, readie to fight, que∣rulous, and mischievous: High-land∣men. they bee commonly tearmed High-landmen, who being in deed the right progenie of the ancient Scots, speak Irish, & call themselves Albinich ; their bodies be firmely made and well compact, able withall and strong, nimble of foot, high minded, inbread and nuzzeled in warlike exercises, or robberies rather, and upon a deadly feud and hatred most forward and desperate to take revenge. They goe attired Irish-like, in stript or streaked mantles of divers colours, wearing thicke and long glibbes of haire, living by hunting, fishing, fowling, and stealing. In the warre their armour is an head-peece or Morion of iron, and an habergeon or coat of maile: their weapons bee bowes, barbed or hooked arrowes, and broad backe-swords: and being divided by certaine families or kinreds, which they terme Clannes, they commit such cruell outrages, what with robbing, spoiling, and killing, that their savage crueltie hath forced a law to bee enacted, whereby it is lawfull, That if any person out of any one Clanne or kinred of theirs hath tres∣passed ought and done harme, Parliament. 1581. whosoever of that Clanne or linage chance to bee ta∣ken, he shall either make amends for the harmes, or else suffer death for it; when as the whole Clan commonly beareth feud for any hurt received by any one member thereof, by execution of lawes, order of justice, or otherwise. PERTHIA, OR PERTH Sheriffdome. The river Tau. O Ut of the very bosome of Mountaines of Albany, Tau the grea∣test river of all Scotland issueth: and first runneth amaine through the fields, untill that spreading broad into a lake full of Islands, hee restraineth and keepeth in his course. Then gathe∣ring himselfe narrow within his bankes into a channell, and wa∣tering Perth, a large, plentifull and rich countrey, he taketh in un∣to him Amund, a small river comming out of Athol. Athol. This Athol, that I may digresse a little out of my way, is infamous for witches and wicked women: the countrey, otherwise fertile enough, hath vallies bespread with forrests: Caledon wood. namely, where that WOOD CALEDONIA, dreadfull to see to for the sun∣drie turnings and windings in and out therein, for the hideous horrour of dark shades, for the burrowes and dennes of wild bulls with thicke manes (whereof I made men∣tion heretofore) extended it selfe in old time farre and wide everie way in these parts. As for the places herein, they are of no great account, but the Earles thereof are ve∣ry memorable. Thomas, a younger sonne of Rolland of Galloway, was in his wives right Earle of Athol, Earles of A∣thol. whose sonne Patricke was by the Bissets his concurrents murdered in feud, at Hadington in his bed-chamber, and forthwith the whole house wherein hee lodged burnt, that it might be supposed he perished by casualtie of fire. Chroniron Vailrosse. In the Earldome there succeeded David Hastings, who had married the aunt by the mothers side of Patricke; whose sonne that David surnamed of Strathbogie may seeme to be, who a little after, in the reigne of Henrie the third King of England, being Earle of Athol, married one of the daughters and heires of Richard, base sonne to John King of England, and had with her a verie goodly inheritance in England. She bare unto him two sonnes, John Earle of Athol, who being of a variable disposition and untrustie, was hanged up aloft on a gallowes fiftie foot high; and David Earle of Athol, unto whom by marriage with one of the daughters and heires of John Comin of Badzenoth, by one of the heires of Aumar de Valence Earle of Penbroch, there fell great lands and possessions. His sonne David, who under King Edward the se∣cond was otherwhiles amongst English Earles summoned to the Parliaments in Eng∣land, and under King Edward Balliol made Lord Lievtenant Generall of Scotland, was vanquished by the valerous prowesse of Andrew de Murray, and slaine in bat∣taile within the Forrest of Kelblen in the yeere of our Lord 1335. And his sonne Da∣vid left two young daughters only, Elizabeth wedded unto Sir Thomas Percie, from whom the Barons of Burrough are descended: and Philip, married to Sir Thomas Halsham an English Knight. Then fell the title of Athol unto that Walter Stewart, sonne to King Robert the second, who cruelly murdered James the first, King of Scotland, and for this execrable crueltie suffered most condigne punishment accor∣dingly: in so much as Aeneas Sylvius, Embassadour at that time in Scotland from Pope Eugenius the fourth, gave out this speech: That hee could not tell whether hee should give them greater commendations that revenged the Kings death, or brand them with sharper censure of condemnation, that distained themselves with so hainous a par∣ricide. After some few yeeres passed betweene, this honour was granted unto John Stew∣art of the family of Lorne, the sonne of James, surnamed The Black Knight, by Joan the widow of King James the first, daughter to John Earle of Somerset, and Niece to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, whose posteritie at this day enjoy the same. Tau bearing now a bigger streame, by receiving Almund unto him, holdeth on his course to Dunkelden, Dunkelden. adorned by King David with an Episcopall See. Most writers grounding upon the signification of that word, suppose it to be a towne of the Caledonians, and interpret it, The Mount or hill of Hazeles, as who would have that name given unto it of the Hazel trees in the wood Caledonia. From hence the Tau goeth forward by the carkasse of Berth, Berth. a little desolate Citie, remembring well enough what a great losse and calamitie hee brought upon it in times past, when with an extraordinarie swelling flood, hee surrounded all the fields, layed the good∣ly standing corne along on the ground, and carried headlong away with him this poore Citie, with the Kings childe and infant in his cradle, and the inhabitants there∣in. In steed whereof in a more commodious place, Perth. King William builded Perth, which straightwaies became so wealthy, that Necham, who lived in that age, versifi∣ed of it in this manner: Transis ample Tai per rura, per oppida, per Perth, Regnum sustentant istius urbis opes. By villages, by townes, by Perth, thou runn'st great Tay amaine, The riches of this Citie Perth doth all the realme sustaine. But the posteritie ensuing called it of a Church founded in honour of Saint John, Saint Iohns towne: Saint John Towne. and the English, whiles the warres were hot betweene the Bru∣ses and the Balliols, fortified it with great bulwarks, which the Scots afterwards, for the most part overthrew, and dismantled it themselves. Howbeit it is a proper pre∣tie Citie, pleasantly seated betweene two Greenes: and for all that some of the Churches be destroyed, yet a goodly shew it maketh; ranged and set out in such an uniforme maner, that in everie severall street almost there dwell severall artificers by themselves, and the river Tau bringeth up with the tide sea commodities by lighters: whereupon J. Jonston, so often now by me cited, writeth thus. PERTHUM. Propter aquas Tai liquidas, & amoena vineta, Obtinet in medio regna superba solo. Nobilium quondam regum clarissima sedes, Pulchra situ, & pinguis germine dives agri. Finitimis dat jura locis, moremque modumque, Huic dare, laus illis haec meruisse dari. Sola inter patrias incincta est moenibus urbes, Hostibus assiduis ne vaga praeda foret. Quanta virûm virtus, dextrae quae praemia, nôrunt Cimber, Saxo ferox, & genus Hectoridum. Felix laude novâ, felix quoque laude vetustâ, Perge recens priscum perpetuare decus. PERTH. Neere to the waters cleere of Tay, and pleasant plaines all greene, In middle ground betweene them stands Perth proudly like a Queene. Of noble Kings the stately seat and palace once it was, Faire for the site, and rich with all for spring of corne and grasse. To neighbour places all it doth lawes, customes, fashions give, Her praise to give; theirs to deserve the same for to receive. Of all the Cities in these parts walled alone is she, Lest she to foes continuall a scambling prey might be. What Knights she bred, and what rewards they won to knighthood due, Danes, Saxons fierce, bold Britans eke the Trojans off-spring knew. Happie for praises old, happie for praises new of late, New as thou art, thine honour old strive to perpetuate. Earle of Perth. And now of late King James the sixth hath erected it to the title of an Earldome, ha∣ving created James Baron Dromund Earle of Perth. Baron Meth∣wen. Unto Perth these places are neere neighbours, Methven, which Margaret an Eng∣lish Ladie, widow unto King James the fourth, purchased with readie money for her third husband Henrie Steward descended of the royall blood, and for his heires; and withall obtained of her sonne King James the fifth for him the dignitie of a Baron. More beneath is Rethuen, Rethuen, or Reuven. a castle of the Rethuens, whose name is of damned memo∣rie, considering that the three states of the kingdome hath ordained, that whosoever were of that name, should forgoe the same, and take unto them a new; after that the Rethuens, brethren in a most cursed and horrible conspiracie, had complotted to murder their soveraigne King James the sixth, who had created William their fa∣ther Earle of Gourie, and afterward beheaded him being lawfully convicted, when he would insolently prescribe lawes to his soveraigne. But of men condemned to per∣petuall oblivion I may seeme to have said overmuch, although it concerneth poste∣ritie also for a Caveat, that wicked generations be notified, as well as noisome weeds and venemous plants. Gourie. As for the countrey Gourie aforesaid, famous for the corn-fields, and singular ferti∣litie of the soile, it lyeth more plaine and flat along the other banke of Tay. In this tract over against Perth, Scone. on the farther side of Tay, standeth Scone, a renowned mona∣sterie in old time, and of reverend respect for the coronation therein of the Kings of Scotland: since that time K. Keneth having hard by put the Picts for the most part to the sword, placed a stone here enclosed within a chaire of wood for inauguration of the Kings of Scotland, that had beene transported out of Ireland into Argile: which stone Edward the first King of England, caused to bee conveied unto Westminster. Touching which I have put down this prophesie, so rise in everie mans mouth, since it hath now proved true and taken effect, as verie few of that sort doe. Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum Inveniunt lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem. Except old sawes be vaine, And wits of wisards blind, The Scots in place must raigne, Where they this stone shall finde. Baron of Scone. But now Scone giveth title of Baron of Scone to Sir David Murray, whom K. James for his good service advanced lately to that honour. Arrol. Earls of Arrol. Where Tay now growne bigger enlargeth himselfe, there appeareth over it Ar∣rol, the habitation of the noble Earles of Arrol, who ever since the Bruses daies have beene by inheritance the Constables of Scotland: and verily they deduce an anci∣ent pedegree from one Hay, a man of exceeding strength and excellent courage; who together with his sonnes, in a dangerous battaile of Scots against the Danes at Long∣cartie, caught up an Oxe yoke, and so valiantly and fortunately withall, what with fighting, and what with exhorting, re-enforced the Scots at the point to shrinke and recule, that they had the day of the Danes, and the King, with the States of the king∣dome, ascribed the victorie and their owne safetie unto his valour and prowess. Whereupon in this place, the most battle & fruitfull grounds were assigned unto him and his heires; who in testimony hereof have set over their coat a yoke for their crest, over their Armes, Huntly castle. Three Escotcheons Geules in Argent. Touching Huntley castle, that joyneth unto it, I have nothing to write, but that it hath given title to a very potent, great, and honourable family, whereof I am to speake hereafter. ANGUSIA, or ANGUS. B Y the out-let or mouth of Tay, and more within, beside the river North-Eske, Anguis called by the naturall and true Scots Ae∣neia, lyeth extended with goodly fields bearing wheat and corne of all kinds plentifully, with large hills also and pooles, forrests, pastures, and meadowes, and also garnished with many forts and castles. In the very first entry into it from Goury, standeth Glamis, Barons Gla∣mys. a castle, and the Baronie of a family surnamed Lions, which arose to honour and reputation, ever since that Sir I. Lion standing in the high favour of King Robert the Second, received this and the dignity of a Baron with the Kings daughter, for her marriage portion, and therewith, as I finde writ∣ten, the surname of Lion : with a Lion in his Armes, within a Treassure Floury, as the Kings themselves doe beare, but in different colours: like as Sir Patrick Lion, Lord Glamis, who now liveth, was advanced very lately by King James the Sixth of that name to the honour of the Earle of Kinghorn. Not farre hence standeth Forfare, Forfar Sher¦dome. where for the administration of justice, the Barons Greies are hereditary Sheriffs, who being descended from the Greies of Chil∣lingham in the county of Northumberland, came into Scotland with King James the first, at his returne out of England: upon the first of whom named Andrew, the King of his bounteous liberality bestowed the Seigniorie of Foulis, together with Helen Mortimer in marriage for his advancement. Hard by the mouth of Tay is situate Dundee, Jo. Skene de Verbor. signi sometimes called Alectum: others tearme it in Latin Taodunum ; a towne verily of great resort and trade, and the Con∣stable whereof by a speciall priviledge is Standard-bearer to the King of Scots. He∣ctor Boetius, who was here born, expoundeth this name Dundee by way of allusion, to Donum Dei, Hector Boet¦us. that is, Gods gift. This Hector, in the reflourishing time of learning, wrote the Scottish historie elegantly, and that out of such hidden and farre fetched monuments of antiquitie, that Paulus Iovius wondered in his writings, there should be records extant for above a thousand yeeres, of these remote parts of the world, Scotland, the Hebrides, and the Orcades: considering that Italy, the nource of fine wits, for so many ages after the Goths were cast out, was defective of writers and re∣cords. But of this place Master Ionston, borne not farre from it, writeth thus. TAODUNUM, OR DEIDONUM. Quâ Notus argutis adspirat molliter auris, Hâc placidè coeunt Taus & Oceanus. Hîc facili excipiens venientes littore puppes Indigenis vasti distrahit orbis opes. Saepè dolis tentata, & belli exercita damnis, Invictis animis integra praestat adhuc. Fama vetus crevit cum Relligione renatâ, Lucis & hinc fulsit para nitela aliis. Alectum dixêre priùs; si maxima spectes Commoda, fors Donum dixeris esse Dei. Tu decus aeternum genrisque urbisque Boeti, Caetera dic patriae dona beata tuae. DONDEE, or DUNDEE. Where South wind with his whistling blasts aloft doth mildly blow, There Tay with streame, and sea with tide doe friendly meet below. And here Dundee, ships under saile harbring in gentle road, The wide worlds wealth to Inlanders both sells and sends abroad. By wiles betraied, by force assailed oft times like to have beene, With heart undaunted to this day it stands sound to be seene. With new spring of religion her old fame more did grow: Hence shone pure light, hence to the rest cleere beames full bright did show. At first Alectum clep'd it was: but if you marke withall Her gifts so great, perhaps you will it Gift of God. Donum Dei call. Thou Boeth now, this peoples praise, and Cities joy for aye, The blessings all besides of thine owne native place shalt say. Brochtie Crag. 1547. From hence standeth within sight Brochty-cragge, a good fortresse, which the Eng∣lish garrison souldiers manfully defended and made good for many moneths toge∣ther, what time as in their affectionate love to a perpetuall peace, they desired and wished for a marriage betweene Marie, heire apparent of Scotland, and Edward the sixth King of England; and upon promise thereof, demanded it by force of armes: and in the end, of their owne accord abandoned the said piece. Then there lieth full against the open Ocean Aberbroth, Arbroth. short Arbroth, a place endowed with ample re∣venues, and by King William dedicated in old time to Religion, in honour of Tho∣mas of Canterburie; beside which the Red-head, a Promontorie. Red-head shooteth into the deepe sea, and is to bee seene a farre off: Hard by South Eske voideth it selfe into the Ocean; which river flowing amaine out of a lake, passeth by Finnevim Castle, well knowne by reason of the Lindeseies Earles of Crawford keeping residence there; of whom I have alreadie written. Brechin. Then upon the said river standeth Brechin, which King David the first adorned with a Bishops See; Mont-Rose. and at the very mouth thereof Mont-rose, as one would say the Mount of Roses ; a towne in times past called Celurca, risen by the fall of another towne bearing the same name, which is seated betweene the two Eskes, and imparteth the title of Earle to the family of the Grahams. Concerning which towne Ionston hath these verses. CELURCA, five MONS ROSARUM. Aureolis urbs picta rosis, mons molliter urbi Imminet, hinc urbi nomina facta canunt. At veteres perhibent quondam dixisse Celurcam, Nomine sic prisco & nobilitata novo est. Et prisca atque nova insignis virtute, virumque Ingeniis, patriae qui perperere decus. MONT-ROSE. With Roses gay the towne is deckt, an easie Mount withall Stands neere the same, and hence they say MONT-ROSE folke did it call. In former times by ancient name Celurca men it knew, Ennobled thus you see it is by name both old and new: Both old and new renowne it hath for prowesse and for wit, Of men that have their countrey grac'd and honour won to it. Boschain. Not farre from hence is Boschain, belonging to the Barons of Ogiluy, of very ancient nobilitie, lineally descended from Alexander Sheriffe of Angus, who was slaine in the bloodie battaile at Harley against the Mac Donald of the out Isles. As touching the Earles of Angus; Earles of gus. Gilchrist of Angus, renowned for his brave ex∣ploits under King Malcolm the fourth, was the first Earle of Angus that I read of. About the yeere 1242. Iohn Comin was Earle of Angus, who died in France; and his widow (haply inheritrice to the Earldome) was married to Sir Gilbert Um∣franvill an Englishman. For, both hee and his heires successively after him, were summoned to the Parliaments in England (untill the third yeere of King Richard the second) by the title of Earles of Angus. Howbeit the Lawyers of England refused in their Brieves and instruments to acknowledge him Earle, for that Angus was not within the kingdome of England, untill hee had brought forth openly in the face of the Court, the Kings writ and warrant, wherein he was summoned to the Parliament by the name of Earle of Angus. In the reigne of David Brus, Thomas Stewart was Earle of Angus, who by a suddaine surprise won Barwicke, and streightwaies lost it; yea, and within a while after died miserably in prison at Dunbritton. But the Douglas∣ses, men of haughtie mindes and invincible hearts, from the time of King Robert the third have beene Earles of Angus (after that George Douglasse had taken to wife the Kings daughter) reputed the chiefe and principall Earles of Scotland, and to whom this office belongeth, to carrie the regall Crown before the Kings at all the solemne assemblies of the kingdome. The sixth Earle of Angus out of this stocke, was Ar∣chebald, who espoused Margaret daughter to Henrie the seventh K. of England, and mother to James the fifth King of Scots, by whom he had issue Margaret wife to Matthew Stewart Earle of Lennox ; who after her brothers decease, that died child∣lesse, willingly resigned up her right and interest in this Earldome, unto Sir David Douglasse of Peteindreich, her unkles sonne by the fathers side, and that with the con∣sent of her husband and sonnes; to the end that she might binde the surer unto her selfe, by the linke also of a beneficiall demerite, that family, which otherwise in bloud was most neere; what time as Henrie her son went about to wed Marie the Queen: by which marriage King JAMES our Soveraigne, the mightie Monarch of great Bri∣taine, was happily borne to the good of all Britaine. MERNIS. T Hese regions were in Ptolomees time inhabited by the VERNI∣CONES, the same perhaps that the VECTURIONES mentio∣ned by Marcellinus. But this their name is now quite gone, un∣lesse wee would imagine some little peece thereof to remaine in Mernis. For many times in common speech of the British tongue, V. turneth into M. This small province Mernis abutting upon the German O∣cean, and of a rich and battle soile, lieth very well, as a plaine and levell Champion. But the most memorable place therein is Dunnotyr, Dunotyr. a Castle advanced upon an high and unaccessible rocke, whence it looketh downe to the underflowing sea; well fensed with strong walls and turrets, which hath beene a long time the habitation of the Keiths, of an ancient and verie noble stock; Keith. Earles Mar. shall. who by the guidance of their vertue be∣came hereditarie Earles Mareschals of the kingdome of Scotland, and Sheriffes of this province. In a porch or gallerie here, is to bee seene that ancient inscription which I mentioned even now, of a companie belonging to the twentieth legion, the letters whereof the right noble and honourable Earle now living, a great lover of an∣tiquitie, caused to be guilded. Fordon. Sherifdome Kinkerdin, Mernis. Somewhat farther from the sea standeth Fordon, gra∣ced in some sort and commendable in regard of John de Fordon ; who being borne here, diligently and with great paines compiled Scoti Chronicon, that is, The Scottish Chronicle: unto whose laborious studies the Scottish Historiographers are very much indebted: but more glorious and renowned in old time, for the reliques of St. Palladius, St. Palladius bestowed and shrined sometime, as is verily thought, in this place; who in the yeere 431. was by Pope Caelestinas appointed the Apostle of the Scottish nation. MARRIA, or MAR. F Rom the sea in the mediterranean or inland parts above Mernis, MAR enlargeth it selfe, and runneth forward threescore miles, or thereabout: where it lieth broadest Westwards, it swelleth up with mountaines, unlesse it bee where the rivers Dee, which Ptolomee calleth DIVA, and Done make way for themselves, and enfertile the fields. Kildrummy. Upon the bank of Done, Kildrummy stan∣deth as a faire ornament to the countrey, being the ancient seat of the Earles of Marre: and not farre distant from it the habitation of the Barons Forbois, Barons For∣bois. who being issued from a noble and ancient stocke, assumed this surname; whereas before time they were called Bois, after that the heire of that family had manfully killed a savage and cruell Beare. But at the very mouth of this river, there be two townes that give greater ornament, which of the said mouth, that in the British tongue they call Aber, borrowing one name, are divided asunder by one lit∣tle field lying betweene: the hithermore of them, which standeth neerer to Dee mouth, is much ennobled by an Episcopall dignitie (which King David the first translated hither from Murthlake a little village) by faire houses of the Canons, an Hospitall for poore people, and a free Grammar schoole; which William Elphinston, Bishop of the place in the yeere 1480. consecrated to the training up of youth, and is called New Aberdon: The other beyond it, named Old Aberdon, is most famous for the taking of Salmons. Salmons. But J. Ionston, a native hereof, in these his verses depainteth Aberdon thus. ABERDONIA. Ad Boream porrecta jugis obsessa superbis, Inter connatas eminet una Deas. Mitior algentes Phoebus sic temperat auras, Non aestum ut rabidum, frigora nec metuas. Faecundo ditat Neptunus gurgite, & amnes Piscosi: gemmis alter adauget opes. Candida mens, frons laeta, hilaris, gratissima tellus Hospitibus: morum cultus ubique decens. Nobilitas antiqua, opibus subnixa vetustis, Martiaque invicto pectore corda gerens. Iustitiae domus, & studiorum mater honoris Ingenio ars, certant artibus ingenia. Omnia ei cedunt, meritos genetricis honores Pingere non ulla Ars, ingeniumvè valet. Beset with loftie tops of hills, and Northward lying spread, Among her sister-townes alone she beareth up her head. The warme sun-beames such temper give to sharpnesse of the aire, That neither scorching heat you need, nor pinching cold to feare. The sea, the fishfull rivers eke, with plenteous gulfes and streames, Make this place rich, and one of them enriches it with gemmes. Plain-hearted men, of lightsome lookes, and cheerfull, passing kind To strangers: decent everie thing and neat you shall there finde. Their noble gentrie ancient, their livings ancient were And their demesnes: undaunted hearts and martiall mindes they beare. The Justice Hall, as mother kinde, she honours due doth daigne Professions all; art strives with wit, and wit with arts againe. All short of her. But praises all of this my genitresse That she deserves, no wit nor art is able to expresse. It is almost incredible what abundance of Bede, and oui writers called them in Lati Isicii. Salmons as well these rivers, as others also in Scotland on both sides of the realme, doe breed. This fish was altogether un∣knowne unto Plinie, unlesse it were that Esox of the Rhene: but in this North part of Europe passing well known, shining and glittering (as he saith) with his red bowels. In Autumne they engender within little rivers, and in shallow places for the most part, what time they cast their spawne, and cover it over with sand: and then are they so poore and leane, that they seeme to have nothing else in a manner but their small bones. Of that spawn in the spring next following there comes a frie of render little fishes, which making toward the sea, in a small time grow to their full bignesse: and in returning backe againe to seeke for the rivers wherein they were bred, they strive and struggle against the streame: and looke whatsoever lyeth in their way to hinder their passage, with a jerke of their taile, and a certaine leape (whence haply they had their name Salmons) to the wonder of the beholders, they nimbly whip over; and keepe themselves within these rivers of theirs untill they breed. During which time it is enacted by law they should not bee caught; namely, from the feast of the As∣sumption of our Ladie, to the feast of Saint Andrew in winter. And it should seeme they were reputed among the greatest commodities of Scotland, when likewise it was ordained that they should not be sold unto Englishmen, but for English gold, and no other contentation. But these matters I leave for others. To come now unto the Earles of Marre. Earles of Mar. In the reigne of Alexander the third, William Earle of Marre is named among those that were sore offended and displea∣sed with the King. Whiles David Brus reigned, Donald Earle of Marre, Protector of the Kingdome, was before the battaile at Dyplin murdered in his bed, by Edward Balliol, and the Englishmen that came to aide him: whose daughter Isabel King Robert Brus tooke to be his former wife, on whom he begat Marjorie mother to Ro∣bert Stewart King of Scots. Under the same David there is mention also made of Thomas Earle of Marre, who was banished in the yeere 1361. Likewise in the reign of Robert the third, Alexander Stewart is named Earle of Marre, who in the battell at Harley against the Ilanders lost his life, in the yeer 1411. In the daies of King James the first we read in Scoto-Chronicon thus: Scotochronicon lib. 12. cap. 33. Alexander Earle of Marre died in the yeere 1435. the base son of Alexander Stewart Earle of Bucquan, sonne to Robert the second King of Scots; after whom, as being a bastard, the King succeeded in the inheritance. John the second sonne of King James the second afterwards bare this title; who being convict for attempting by art magicke to take away the King his brothers life, was let blood to death. And after him Robert Cockeran was promoted from a Mason to this dignitie by King James the third, and soon after hanged by the Nobilitie. Since which time this honourable title was discontinued, untill that Queen Marie adorned therewith James her bastard brother: and not long after, when it was found that by ancient right the title of Earle of Marre appertained to John Lord Ereskin, in lieu of Marre she conferred upon him the honour of Earle Murray, and created Iohn Eres∣kin, a man of ancient and noble birth Earle of Marre ; whose sonne bearing the same Christian name, now enjoieth also the same dignity, and is in both realmes one of the Kings Privie Councell. BUCHANIA OR BUQUHAN. T He TAIZALI mentioned by Ptolomee, in ancient times inhabited where now Buquhan, in Latin Boghania and Buchania, above the ri∣ver Done beareth forth toward the German sea. Some derive this latter name a Bobus, that is, From Oxen and Kine ; whereas notwith∣standing the ground serveth better to feed sheepe, whose woole is highly commended. Albeit the rivers in this coast everie where breed great store of Salmons, River Ratra. yet doe they never enter into the river Ratra, as Bu∣chanan hath recorded. Neither let it be offensive if I cite his testimonie, although his bookes by authoritie of Parliament in the yeere 1584. were forbidden: because many things in them contained are to be dashed out. An admirable water. Who also hath written, That on the banke of Ratra there is a cave neere unto Stangs Castle, the nature whereof seemeth not to be passed over. The water distilling by drops out of a naturall vault, presently tur∣neth into Pyramidall stones, and were not the said cave or hole otherwhiles rid and clean∣sed by mans labour, the whole space as far as up to the vault would in short time be filled therewith. Now the stone thus engendred is of a middle nature betweene yee and hard stone: for it is brittle and easie to crumble, neither groweth it ever to the soliditie and hardnesse of marble. Claik-geese. Concerning those Claik-geese, which some with much admira∣tion have beleeved to grow out of trees, both upon this shore & elsewhere, and when they be ripe to fall downe into the sea, it is scarce worth the labour to mention them. That there be little birds engendred of old and rotten keeles of ships, they can beare witnesse, who saw that ship wherein Francis Drake sailed about the world, standing in a docke neere the Tamis ; to the outside of the keele whereof a number of such lit∣tle birds without life and feathers stuck close. Yet would I gladly thinke that the ge∣neration of these birds, was not out of the logges of wood, but from the very Ocean, which the Poets tearmed the Father of all things. Amber. A mightie masse likewise of Amber, as bigge as the bodie of an horse, was not ma∣ny yeeres since cast upon this shore. The learned call it Succinum, Glessum, and Chry∣so-Electrum: and Sotacus supposed that it was a certaine juice or liquor which distil∣leth out of trees in Britain, and runneth downe into the sea, and is therein hardned. Tacitus also was of the same opinion, when he wrote thus: I can verily beleeve, that like as there be trees in the secret and inward parts of the East, Concerning the manners of the Germans. which sweat out frankin∣cense and balme, so in the Ilands and other countries of the West, there bee woods and groves of a more fattie and firme substance, which melting by the hot beames of the Sunne approching so neere, runneth into the sea hard by, and by force of tempest floateth up to the shores against it. But Serapio, and the Philosophers of later times write that it ariseth out of a certain clammie and bituminous earth under the sea, and by the sea side; and that the billowes and tempests cast up part thereof a land, and fishes devoure the rest: But I digresse extravagantly, I will into my way againe, and since I acknowledge my fault, let my confession purchase pardon. Earles of Bu∣quhan. In the reigne of King Alexander the second, Alexander Comin rose up to the ho∣nour of Earle of Buquhan, who married the daughter and one of the heires of Roger de Quincie Earle of Winchester in England, and his Niece by a sonne brought the same title unto Henrie de Beaumont her husband: for he, in King Edward the third his daies had his place in the Parliament of England, by the name of Earl of Buquhan. Afterwards, Alexander Stewart, sonne to King Robert the second, was Earle of this place; unto whom succeeded John, a younger sonne of Robert Duke of Albanie, who arriving in France with seven thousand Scottishmen to aide Charles the seventh King of France, bare himselfe valiantly, and performed singular good service against the Englishmen, and that with so great commendation, as having victoriously slaine Thomas Duke of Clarence brother to Henrie the fifth King of England at Baugie, and discomfited the English, The valour of Scots in the wars of France. he was made Constable of France. But in the third yeere following, when the fortune of warre turned, hee, with other most valiant Knights, to wit, Archibald Douglasse Earle of Wigton, and Duke of Touraine, &c. was vanqui∣shed at Vernoil by the English, and there slain. Whom notwithstanding, as that Po∣et said, —aeternum memorabit Gallia cives Grata suos, titulos quae dedit & tumulos. France thankfully will ay recount, as citizens of her owne, On whom both titles glorious, and tombes she hath bestowne. Certes, whereas under the K.K. Charles the sixth and seventh France was preser∣ved, and Aquitain recovered, by thrusting out the English, the Frenchmen cannot chuse but acknowledge themselves much beholden to the fidelitie and fortitude of the Scottish. But afterwards King James the first gave the Earldome of Buquhan un∣to George of Dunbar, moved thereto upon pitie and commiseration, because hee had deprived him before of the Earldom of March by authority of Parliament, for his fa∣thers crime: and not long after, James the sonne of James Stewart of Lorn, surnamed the Black Knight, whom he had by Q. Joan sister to the Duke of Somerset, and wid∣dow to King James the first, obtained this honour, and left it to his posteritie: but for default not long since of heires male, it came by a daughter married to Robert Doug∣las, a younger brother of Douglas of Lochlevin, to the family of the Douglasses. From Buquhan, as the shore bendeth backward and turneth full into the North, lieth Boena, Boen. Barons of Sal∣ton. Strathbolgy. and Bamff a small Sherifdome, also Ajuza a little territorie of no especiall account, and Rothamay castle, the dwelling place of the Barons of Salton, surnamed A∣bernethy. Beneath these lieth Strath-bolgy, that is, the vale by Bolgy, the habitation in times past of the Earls of Athol, who of it assumed their surname; but now the princi∣pall seat of Marquesse Huntly. Marquesse Huntly. For this title K. James the sixth conferred upon George Gordon, Earle Huntly, Lord Gordon and Badzeneth, a man of great honour and reputa∣tion for his ancient noblenesse of birth, and the multitude of his dependants and fol∣lowers: whose ancesters descended from the Setons, by Parliamentarie authoritie took the name of Gordon (when as Sir Alexander Seton had taken to wife the daughter of Sir Iohn Gordon Knight, by whom he had a large and rich inheritance) and received the honour of the Earle of Huntly at the hands of King James the second, in the yeere 1449. MORAVIA, or MURRAY. T He VACOMAGI, Vacomagy. Murray bay. Sinus Vararis. remembred by Ptolomee, anciently inhabited on the fur∣ther side of Crantz-baine-mountain, which, as it were in a continued range, by hills hanging one by another, driveth out his ridge with many a win∣ding as far as to Murray frith, where now lieth Murray, in Latin Moravia, celebrated for the fertilitie, pleasant site, and commoditie of fruitfull trees. By this Province, The river Spey. History of John Lesley Bishop of Rosse. Spey a famous river maketh his issue into the sea, wherein he lodgeth, when hee hath watered Rothes Castle, whence the family of the Lesleys tooke the title of Earle, ever since that K. James the second conferred the honour of Earle of Rothes upon Sir George Lesley. Concerning this Spey our Poet Necham hath thus written. Spey loca mutantis praeceps agitator arenae, Inconstans certas nescit habere vias. Officium lintris corbis subit, hunc regit audax Cursus labentis nauta fluenta sequens. Spey raising heaps of sand amaine, that shift oft times their place, Inconstant he doth change eftsoones, and keeps no certaine race. A panier serves here for a boat, some ventrous swaine it guides, Who followeth still the rivers course, while downe the streame it glides. The river LOXA mentioned by Ptolomee, The river Loxa. which now is called Losse, hideth him∣selfe in the sea hard by, neere unto which Elgina appeareth, in which and in Forres adjoining I. of Dunbar of Cumnock, descended from the stock of the Earles of March, hath his jurisdiction as Sheriff by inheritance. But where it is now readie to enter in∣to the sea, he findeth a more plaine and soft soile, and spreadeth abroad into a Meere full of swans, wherein the herbe Olorina plentifully groweth, hee hath Spiny Castle standing upon it, Baron of Spi∣ny. whereof now the first Baron is Alexander, of the linage of the Lind∣seys ; like as Kinlosse also a neighbour by, sometime a famous Monasterie (some call it Kill-flos, of certaine flowers miraculously there springing up on a sudden, when the carkase of King Duff, murdred and hidden in the same place, was found) hath also for the Lord thereof Edward Brus, M. of the Rolls in England, & of the Kings Majesties Privie Counsell, Baron Kinlos. whom King James the sixth created Baron Brus of Kinlosse. Thus much for the shore. More inward, where now standeth Bean Castle (thought to bee BANATIA that Ptolomee mentioneth) Banatia. there was found in the yeere 1460. a vessell of marble artificially engraven, and full of Roman coine. Hard by is Nardin, or Narne, Narne Sherif∣dome. an hereditable Sherifdome of the Cambels of Lorne ; where there stood within a Biland, a fortresse of a mightie heighth, built with wonderfull bulwarks, and in times past defended by the Danish forces against the Scottish. A little off is Logh-Nesse, a very great Lake, Logh-Nesse. as reaching out 23. miles in length; the Water whereof is so warme, that even in this cold and frozen climate it never freezeth: from which, by a verie small Isthim or partition of hils, the Logh Lutea or Louthea, which by Aber let∣teth it selfe forth into the West sea, is divided. Neere unto these Loghs, there stood in old time two notable fortifications, Innernesse. the one named Innernesse, the other Innerlo∣thea, according to the names of the said Loghs. Innernes hath for Sheriffe thereof by right of inheritance the Marquesse Huntly, who is of great command hereabout. But have here what M. Jonston hath written jointly of these two. INNERNESSUS, & INNERLOTHEA. Imperii veteris duo propugnacula quondam, Prim que regali moenia structa manu. Turribus oppositis adverso in limine spectat Haec Zephyrum, Solis illa orientis equos. Amnibus hinc atque hinc cincta, utra{que} piscibus amnes Faecundi, haec portu perpete tuta patet. Haec fuit, at jacet heu, jam nunc sine nomine tellus, Hospita quae Regum, est hospita facta feris. Altera spirat adhuc tenuis sufflamina vitae, Quae dabit & fati turbine victa manus. Dic ubi nunc Carthago potens? ubi Martia Roma? Trojáque, & immensae ditis opes Asiae? Quid mireris enim mortalia cedere fatis Corpora? cùm videas oppida posse mori. INNERNESSE, AND INNERLOTHEA. Two mightie forts and holds these were in ancient kingdomes daies, The first wall'd fences, as they say, that hand of Kings did raise. Affront with towres oppos'd they stand, for one of them regards The Westerne winde, but th'other looks the Sun-rising towards. On both sides they their rivers have, and rivers full of fish: One hath an haven frequented aye, and safe as heart can wish. Such was it once; but now alas to wast and desart fields Is turn'd, and that which lodged Kings to wild beasts harbour yeelds. The other yet draw's breath, though deepe, and shewes that it doth live, But over match'd, to destinie at length doth bucklers give. What's now become of Carthage great? where is that martiall Rome? Where Troy? of wealthie Asia the riches all and some? No marvaile now that mortall wights to death be subject, why? Because you plainly see that Townes and Cities great may dye. Earles of Mur∣ray. Under the reigne of Robert Brus, Thomas Randolph his sisters sonne, who in his Countries behalfe undertooke exceeding great paines, and most grievous quar∣rels, was highly renowned by the title of Earle of Murray. Under King Robert the Second, John of Dunbarre tooke to wife the Kings daughter, to make amends for her devirgination, received this Earldome of Murray with her in marriage. Un∣der King James the second William Creichton Chancelour of the Realme, and Archebald Douglas grew to great variance and eagre contention about this Earle∣dome, when as against the lawes and ancient customes, Douglas who had married the younger daughter of James of Dunbar Earle of Murray, was preferred to the Earldom before Creighton who had wedded the elder, and that through the power∣full authoritie that William Earle Douglasse had with the King; which was so great that he advanced not onely him to the Earldom of Murray, but also another brother to the Earldome of Ormund ; and made two cousins of his Earles, the one of Angus, and the other of Morton. But this greatnesse of his, not to be trusted upon because it was excessive, turned soone after to his owne confusion. Under King James the fifth, his own brother, whom he appointed his Vicegerent in the government of the Kingdome, enjoied this honour: and within our remembrance, James the base sonne of King James the fifth received this honour of Queene Mary his sister: but he re∣quited her basely, when conspiring with some few of the Nobilitie, he deposed her from her Royall estate and kingdome; a foule president, and prejudiciall to all Kings and Princes. Which notwithstanding was revenged, for shortly after hee was shot through with a bullet. His onely daughter brought this title unto her husband Sir James Stewart of Downe, who was also of the blood royall from the Dukes of Al∣bany: who being slain by his concurrents left his sonne James to succeed him in this honour. LOQHUABRE. W Hatsoever beyond the Nesse bendeth to the West coast, and ad∣joineth to the Lake Aber, is thereupon called Loghuabre, that is in the ancient tongue of the Britans, The mouth of the Lakes, as what lieth toward the North is commonly called Rosse. Loqhuabre is full of fresh pastures and woods, neither is with∣out yron mines, but not so free in yeeld of corne; but for most fishfull pooles, and rivers scarce inferiour to any country therea∣bout. At Logh-Lothey, Innerlothe. Innerlothey, fensed with a fort, and well frequented with Mer∣chants, was of great name and importance in times past, but being razed by the pi∣racies and warres of Danes and Norwegians, it hath lien for these many ages so for∣let, that there remaineth scarce any shew of it; which those verses that I alledged even now doe imply. Loqhuabre hath had, so farre as I have read, no Earles: but about the yeere of our salvation 1050. there was a Thane over it of great fame, Thane of Lo∣qhuabre. Banqhuo. and much spoken of, named Banqhuo, whom Macbeth the bastard, when with murder & blood∣shed he had usurped the crowne, being fearfull and suspicious, caused to bee made a∣way; for that he had learned by a Prophesie of certaine wise women, that his poste∣ritie, when the line of Macbeth was expired and extinct, should one day obtaine the Kingdome, and by a long successive descent reigne in Scotland. Which verily hath fallen out accordingly. For Fleanch the sonne of Banqhuo, who unknowne in the darke escaped the traines laid for him, led into Wales, where for a time hee kept himselfe close: and having taken to wife Nesta the daughter of Griffith ap Lewellin Prince of North-wales, begat Walter; who returning into Scotland, with so great fame of his fortitude repressed the rebellion of the Ilanders, and with as great wis∣dome managed the Kings revenewes in this tract, that the King made him Senes∣chall, whom they commonly call Stewart of the whole Kingdome of Scotland. Whereupon this name of Office imposed the surname Stewart unto his posteritie: The beginning of the Stewarts family. who spreading throughout all parts of Scotland into a number of noble branches, after many honours heaped upon them, have flourished a long time, and from out of them, three hundred yeeres agoe and thirtie, Robert Stewart by Marjorie his mother, daughter to King Robert Brus, obtained the Kingdome of Scotland: and now lately James Stewart of that name the sixth King of Scots, by Margaret his great grandmother, daughter to King Henrie the seventh (the divine power of that most high and almightie Ruler of the world so disposing) is ascended with the gene∣rall applause of all nations, to the height of Monarchicall majestie over all Britaine, and the Isles adjacent. ROSSIA. T He Province ROSSE, so called by an old Scottish word, which some interpret to be a Promontorie, others a Biland, was inhabi∣ted by the people named CANTAE (which terme in effect impli∣eth as much) in the time of Ptolomee. The people Cantae. This extendeth it selfe so wide and large, that it reacheth from the one sea to the other. What way it beareth upon the Vergivian or Western Ocean, by reason of huge swelling mountaines advancing their heads aloft, and many woods among them, it is full of stagges, roe buckes, fallow Deere, and wilde foule: but where it butteth upon the German sea, it is more lovely bedect with corne fields and pastures, and withall much more civill. In the very first entrance into it Ardmanoch, Baron of Ard∣manoch. no small territorie, whereof the second sonnes of the Kings of Scotland beare the title, riseth up with high mountaines, that are most trustie preser∣vers of snow. The height of hils, and depth of sea. Plutarch. in Pub. Aemilius, concerning O∣lympus. As touching their height, some have reported unto me strange won∣ders: and yet the ancient Geometers have written, that neither the depth of sea, nor height of hills exceed by the plumbe line ten stadia, that is, one mile and a quarter. Which notwithstanding, they that have beheld Tenariffe, amongst the Canarie I∣lands, which is fifteene leagues high, and sailed withall the Ocean neere unto them, will in no wise admit for truth. In this part standeth Lovet Castle, and the Baronie of the worthy family of the Frasers, whom for their singular good service for the Scot∣tish kingdome, King James the second accepted into the ranke of Barons: and whom the Clan-Ranalds, a most bloodie generation, in a quarrell and braule between them, had wholly destroied every mothers sonne, but that by the providence of God, fourescore of the principall persons of this family left their wives at home all great with child, who being delivered of so many sonnes, renewed the house, and multipli∣ed the name againe. But at Nesse mouth there flourished sometimes Chanonrie, so called of a rich Colledge of Chanons, whiles the Ecclesiasticall state stood in pro∣speritie, in which there is erected a See for the Bishop of Rosse. Hard by is placed Cromartie, where Urqhuart, a Gentleman of noble birth, by hereditarie right from his ancestours, ministreth justice as Sheriffe to this Sheriffdome: and this is so commo∣dious and safe an harbour for any fleet, be it never so great, that both Sailers and Geographers name it PORTUS-SALUTIS, Portus Salutis. Littus Altum. that is, The Haven of safetie. Above it is LITTUS ALTUM, whereof Ptolomee maketh mention, called now, as it seemeth, Tarbarth: for there indeed the shore riseth to a great height, enclosed on the one side with Cromer a most secure and safe haven; and on the other with CELNIUS, The river Cel∣nio. Cerones. now Killian the river: and thus much of the places toward the East Oce∣an. Into the west sea the river LONGUS, mentioned in Ptolomee, at this day named Lough Longus, runneth: then the CERONES anciently dwelt where now is Assin∣shire, a countrey much mangled with many inlets and armes of the sea in bosoming it selfe with manifold commodities. Earls of Rosse. As for the Earls of Rosse, it is full of difficulty to set them down in order successively out of writers. About foure hundred yeers past, we read that Ferqhuard flourished & enjoied this title: But for default of issue male, it came by a daughter to Walter Le∣sley, who for his noble feats of armes courageously atchieved under Lewis the Em∣perour, was worthily named The Noble Knight: he begat Alexander Earle of Rosse, and a daughter married unto Donald Lord of the Islands Hebrides. This Alex∣ander had issue one onely daughter, who made over by her deed all her owne title and right unto Robert Duke of Albany: whereat the said Donald of the Islands be∣ing highly enchafed and repining, stiled himselfe in the reigne of James the third, King of the Islands, and Earle of Rosse, having with fire and sword laied waste his na∣tive country far & neere. At length, the said K. James the third by authoritie of Par∣liament, in the yeere 1476. annexed the Earldome of Rosse to the crowne, so as it might not be lawfull for his successours to alienate by any meanes from the crowne, either the Earldome it selfe, or any parcell thereof; or by any device to grant the same unto any person, save onely to the Kings second sonnes lawfully borne: whence it is that Charles the Kings second sonne, Duke of York, at this day holdeth an en∣joieth the title of Earle of Rosse. SUTHERLAND. B Eyond Rosse, Sutherland looketh toward the East Ocean; a land more meet to breed cattell than to beare corne: wherein there be hills of white marble (a wonderfull thing in this so cold a cli∣mate) but of no use almost, Mountains of white marble. considering excesse in building, and that vain ostentation of riches, is not yet reached to these remote regions. Here is Dunrobin, Dun-robin. a castle of very great name, the prin∣cipall seat of the ancient Earles of Sutherland, descended, if I be not deceived, Earles of Su∣therland. out of the family of Murray. Among whom, one William under King Robert Brus is most famous, who married the sister of the whole blood to K. David, and had by her a son, whom the said David declared heire apparant of the crown, and compelled his Nobles to sweare unto him alleageance: but he within a little after de∣parted without issue, and the Earldome in the end came by a daughter and heire here∣ditarily unto A. Gordon, one of the line of the Earles of Huntly. CATHANES. H Igher lieth CATHANES, butting full upon the said East sea bending inward with a number of creakes and compasses, which the waves as it were indent: In which dwelt in Ptolomees time the CATINI, Catini a people. but written falsly in some copies CARINI, among whom the selfe same Ptolomee placeth the river Ila, which may seem to be the Wifle at this day. The inhabitants of this province raised their greatest gaine and revenues by grazing and raising of cattell, and by fishing. The chiefe castle therein is called Girnego, in which the Earls of Catnesse for the most part make their abode. The Bishops sea is in Dornock, a little meane town otherwise; where also King James the fourth appointed the Sheriffe of Catnesse to reside, or else at Wik, as occasions should require, for the administration of justice. The Earles of Catnesse in ancient times were also Earles of the Orcades, Earles of Cathnesse. but at last they became distinct, and by the eldest daughter of one Malise given in marriage to William Seincler the Kings Pantler, his heires successively came to be Earls of Cat∣nesse, and doe still enjoy the same honour. STRATH-NANERN. T He utmost and farthest coast of all Britaine, which with the front of the shore looketh full against the North point, and hath the midst of the grea∣ter Beares taile, which, as Cardan was of opinion, causeth translations of Empires, Cornabii. The river Nabe. just over head, was inhabited, as wee may see in Ptolomee, by the CORNABII, among whom he placeth the river NABEUS, which names are of so neere affinitie; that the nation may seeme to have drawne their denomination from the river that they dwelt by: neither doth the moderne name Strath-Navera, which signifieth the Valley by Navern, jarre altogether in sound from them. The country it selfe is for the soile nothing fertile, and by reason of the sharpe and cold aire, lesse in∣habited; and thereupon sore haunted and annoied with most cruell wolves. Wolves. Which in such violent rage not only set upon cattell, to the exceeding great dammage of the inhabitants, but also assaile men with great danger; and not in this tract onely, but in many other parts likewise of Scotland, in so much as by vertue of an act of Parlia∣ment, the Sheriffes and inhabitants in every countrey, are commanded to goe forth thrice a yeere a hunting, for to destroy the wolves and their whelpes. But (if in this so Northerly a countrey this be any comfort to speak of) it hath of all Britain again the shortest night, The longest daies. and the longest day. For, by reason of the position of heaven here distant from the Aequinoctiall line 59. degrees and fortie minutes, the longest day containeth 18. houres and 25. scruples: and the shortest night not above five houres and 45. scruples. So that the Panegyrist is not true in this, who made report in times past, That the sunne in manner setteth not at all, but passeth by, and lightly glanceth upon the Horizon: haply relying upon this authoritie of Tacitus, for that the extreme points, and plaine levels of the earth, with their shade so low raised up no darknesse at all. But more truely Plinie (according to true reason) where hee treateth of the longest dayes, according to the inclination of the sunnes circle to the Horison. The longest daies (saith he) in Italy are 15. houres, in Britaine 17. where the light nights doe prove that undoubtedly by experience, which reason forceth credibly, that in Midsummer daies, when the sunne approacheth neer to the Pole of the world, the places of the earth under the Pole have day 6. months, though the light having but a narrow compasse, the night contra∣riwise when he is farre remote in middle winter. In this utmost tract, which Ptolomee extendeth out farre East, whereas indeed it beareth full North (for which Roger Bacon in his Geography taxed him long since) where Tacitus said, That an huge and enorme space of ground running still forward to the farthest point, groweth narrow like a wedge. There run out three Promontories, mentioned by the old writers, Berubium. namely BERUBIUM, now called Urdehead, neere to Bernswale a village: Virvedrum. Orcas. VIRVEDRUM, now Dunsby, otherwise named Duncansby, which is thought to be the most remote promontorie of Britain: ORCAS, now named How∣burn, which Ptolomee setteth over against the Islands Orcades, as the utmost of them all: Tarvisium, or Tarvodunum in Marcianus. Tarvus what it is. Shetland. this also in Ptolomee is called TARVEDRUM, and TARVISIUM, and so named, if my conjecture faile me not, because it is the farthest end of Britaine: for Tarvus in the British tongue hath a certaine signification of ending. With which I accordingly will end this booke, purposing to speake of the out-Isles, Orcades, Hebudes or He∣brides, and of Shetland, in their due place. THus have I briefly run over Scotland, and verily more briefly than the worth of so great a kingdom requireth: neither doubt I but that some one or other will set it forth more at large, and depaint it (as I said) with a more flourishing pensill, in greater certainty, and upon better knowledge; when as our most mighty Monarch now ope∣neth those remote places, hitherto fore-closed from us. Meane while, if I have at any time dropt asleepe (for the most watchfull may sometimes bee taken napping) or if some errour in this unknowne tract hath misled mee from the truth (as nothing is more rife and easie than errour) I hope the courteous Reader will pardon it upon my acknowledgment; and of his kindnesse recalling me from errour, direct me in the right way to the truth. HIBERNIAE IRELAND Anglis. YVERDON BRITANNIS ERIN in elis. IERNA Orphaeo & Arist. IRIS Diodoro Siculo IVVERNA Iuuelalj IOYERNIA Ptol. IRELAND, AND THE SMALLER ILANDS IN THE BRITISH OCEAN. THE BRITISH OCEAN. N Ow have I rather passed over than throughly surveied all BRITAIN, namely, those two most flourishing Kingdomes, ENGLAND and SCOTLAND: And whereas I am now to crosse the seas for IRELAND, and the rest of the Isles, if I premise some few lines touching the British sea, The British sea▪ I hope it shal not seem a crooked course, or an extravagāt digression. BRITAIN is encompassed round about with the vast open and main O∣cean, which ebbeth and floweth so violently with main tides, that, as Pytheas of Marsiles hath reported, Lib. Hexame∣ron. cap. 3. it swelleth 80. cubits about Britaine: and St. Ba∣sile hath tearmed it Mare Magnum, &c. The great sea and dreadfull to Sailers: yea and S. Ambrose wrote thus of it ; The great sea not adven∣tured on by sailers, British sea in times past un∣knowne. nor attempted by Mariners, is that which with a roaring and surging current environeth Britaine, and reacheth into far remote parts, and so hidden out of sight, as that the fables have not yet come hither. Certes this sea sometimes overfloweth the fields adjoining, otherwhiles again it retireth & leaveth all bare: and that I may use the words of Plinie, by reason of this open largenesse, it feeleth more effectually the force and influence of the Moone, exercising her power thereupon without impeach∣ment: and it floweth alwaies up within the land with such violence, that it doth not onely drive back the streames of rivers, but also either overtaketh and surpriseth beasts of the land, or else leaveth behind it those of the sea. For there have bin seen in everie age, to the great astonishment of the beholders, so many and so huge Seamonsters left on dry land on our shore, that Horace sang this note not without good cause: Belluosus qui remotis Obstrepit Oceanus Britannis. The Ocean of sea-monsters fraight with store, Upon the Britans farre remote doth roare. And Juvenal in the like tune. Quanto Delphino Balaena Britannica major. As much as Whales full huge, that use to breed In British Sea, the Dolphins doe exceed. And so great an adventure and exploit it was thought, but to crosse only this our sea, that Libanius the Grecian sophister, in a Panegy icall oration unto Constantinus Chlorus, cried out in these words : : that is, This voiage into Britain seemed comparable to the greatest triumph. Iul. Firmicus. And Julius Firmicus, not that famous Astrologer, but another that was a Christian, in a little treatise of the errour of profane re∣ligions, written unto the Emperours Constans & Constantius, brake out in∣to this exclamation. In winter time (a thing that never was done before, nor ever will be done again) ye trampled under your oares the swelling and raging billowes of the British Ocean. The waves of the sea, un∣known in a manner before times unto us, then trembled and quaked, and the Britans were terrified at the sudden presence of the Emperor: What will ye more? the verie elements yeelded themselves as conque∣red unto your valerous vertues. The famous learned man Julius Scaliger in his Poeticalls, affirmeth that Caurus the North-west winde ariseth and bloweth out of this British sea, The winde Caurus. and that against the opinion of Lucan, who wrote thus : Primus ab Oceano caput exeris Atlantaeo, Caure, movens aestus. From Ocean call'd Atlantick, Caur thou first Thy head dost shew, making seas fell and curst. Certes in Ireland he keeps foule work, and plaies the tyrant; and Caesar wri∣teth that a great part of the yeere he stands in this coast. But whereas some write that in this our sea ships were first devised & used, I am not disposed to beleeve them. But Plinie witnesseth that the Britans used small wicker vessels, The old twig∣gen or wicker ships of the Britans. covered over with hides (which at this day they tearm Cor∣raghs) and with Plinie accordeth Lucan, who versifieth in this wise. Primùm cana salix madefacto vimine parvam Texitur in puppim, caesóque induta juvenco, Vectoris patiens tumidum super emicat amnem: Sic Venetus stagnante Pado, fusoque Britannus Navigat Oceano. At first wet twigges of willow grey, that long in soake had laine, And covered over close with hide of Oxe or Bullocke slaine, (But wrought before unto the forme of little barke or boat) Used to carrie passengers, the swelling streames afloat. Thus over Po, that river large, sailes the Venetian, And thus the Britan maketh way upon the spacious Ocean. Semblably Solinus Polyhistor. In the sea between Britain and Ireland they saile in wicker bottomes, which they cover round about with Oxe hides. And how long soever as the course holdeth, so long the sai∣lers forbeare food. As for the commodities which this sea affordeth, the warmth whereby it comforteth and cherisheth the earth, the vapours wherewith it nourisheth the aire, and bedeweth the fields: touching also the great varietie of fishes that it breedeth, as Salmons ( which Bede calleth Isicios, as Plinie Esox) Plaice, Pungers, Cods, Hadocks, Whitings, Herrings, Basse, Maccarell, Mullets, Tur∣bits, Seales or Sea-calves, Rochets, Soles, Pilchards, Raifish or Scale, Thorn∣back, Oisters, Lobsters, Crab-fish, and an infinite number of others, whereof it maintaineth and feedeth innumerable skuls and beds, it is not materiall to speake, Pearles. they are so well knowne. Yet the pearles are not to bee overpassed in si∣lence, which King Jubas reporteth to be shaped round, and to swim in the Bri∣tish sea by flockes or swarmes, in manner of bees, following their Captaine and Leader. And Marcellinus, when he had spoken of the Persian and Indian pearles ; which kind of gemme ( saith he ) we are not ignorant to be engendred and gathered in the creekes of the British sea, although they bee not of that beautie and worth. Which although they be accounted by Plinie small ones, and ill coloured, yet Suetonius writeth, that Caesar made his voiage into Britaine in hope of them; and that they were of such bignesse, as he took the peise of some of them by hand, and dedicated a brest-plate made of them unto Venus Genitrix, which he also witnessed by a subscription. Origen likewise as touching these pearles writeth thus : Sea-pearles, such as be most nota∣ble, are found among the Indians, but the best are bred in the Red sea: In the next place are those pearles which are taken in the British Oce∣an: but of a third sort, and inferiour in goodness not to those first only, but also to these of the second degree, are they that be found in Bospho∣rus neere Scythia. And after a few lines : But that kind which they say is gotten in Britain, for the superficiall colour verily somwhat resembleth a golden hew, but cloudie it is and troubled, and for the lustre with the dimmest Furthermore, our Venerable Bede writing of the Shell-fishes of this our sea : Among them ( saith hee ) there be Musculae. Muscles, wherein they find enclosed oftentimes the best pearle of all colours, of purple, violet, and greene, but especially of bright white. There be cochles al∣so in exceeding great abundance, wherewith they die a scarlet colour: the most beautifull red hew whereof, no heat of sunne, nor injurie of raine is ever able to make pale; but the Vetu tior Venustior. older it is, the fairer it shew∣eth. And Tertullian reproving the lavish expence and superfluitie in his time : If ambitious pride ( saith he ) may be maintained from the British or Indian seas, there is a kind of shell-fish more pleasant in taste, I say not than the purple fish or oister, but than the very scallop it selfe. This sea, which generally is called MARE BRITANNICUM, and OCEA∣NUS CALEDONIUS, according to the divers situation of places hath sundry and distinct names. Eastward, where it hath Germanie opposite unto it, they call it the GERMAN sea: Northward, it is tearmed the Hyberborean sea, which ancient writers reported untruely, to be dead, dull, and heavie for the oare, and in that respect not raised with winds: and Tacitus beleeved it was so, belike, because, as he writeth, the Lands and Mountaines be rare, which mini∣ster cause and matter of tempests, and for that a deep masse of continuat sea is more slowly stirred to work and rage. On the West side it is named OCEANUS DEUCALEDONIUS, and VERGIVIUS, both South and West from Ireland: but all the way that it runneth between Britain and Ireland, the HI∣BERNICUS, that is, Julius Solinus. Irish sea, and by Sea-men at this day S. Georges Chanel, And ancient writers have recorded that it rageth all the yeer long, with surging billowes and counter seas, and never is at rest nor navigable, unlesse it be in some few summer daies. But Southward, where it inter∣floweth France and Britain, it is properly called the BRITISH sea, and by the common mariners, the Chanel, by English sailers the SLEEVE; and in the same sense Le Manche in French, because it groweth narrow in manner of a sleeve. And this name of the BRITISH sea extended as farre as to Spaine, as writeth Pomponius Mela, Lib. 2. c. 4. being himselfe also a Spaniard, where he repor∣teth that the Pyrene Mountain runneth forth into the BRITISH OCEAN. Moreover, there be certain Ilands, which, as it were for a shew, Nature hath be sprinkled along these seas, fewer toward the East and South parts, but West∣ward and Northward more in number. For there, by their thick standing to∣gether, they do after a sort garnish the sea, yea and depaint it as it were with their colours, in most pleasant sort. But for as much as Ireland farre excelleth all the rest, in regard of the greatnesse thereof and frequencie of resort there∣to, it requireth by due right, that it should first be treated of. HIBERNIA, IRELAND. I N the Vergivian sea, The Ocean Vergivian. which name is derived, not à vergendo, that is, of bending towards, as some are of opinion, but of Mor-weridh ; for this name the Britans gave it: or else of Farigi, by which name the Irish men call it, the most famous Iland HIBERNIA, that is to say, IRELAND, encloseth the West side of Britain; an Iland which in times past challenged the third place amongst all the Isles of the then knowne world. For thus as touching Ilands writeth the an∣cient Geographer. : Libro magnae constructionis. that is, Of all Ilands for greatnesse the Indian TAPRO∣BANE is prime and principall; next after it BRITAINE; and in a third degree another British Iland, named HIBERNIA, that is, Ireland; and thereupon Ptolomee called it LITTLE BRITAIN. This Isle by Orpheus, Aristotle, and Claudian is named IERNA; by Iuvenal & Mela JUVERNA; by Diodorus Siculus IRIS; by Martian of Heraclea JOYEPNIA; by Eustathius OYERNIA and BERNIA; by the native inhabitants Erin ; by the Britans Yuerdon, and of English men Ireland. Whence these names have had their originall, sundry and divers opinions have beene conceived from time to time, as in a doubtfull matter. Some derive Hibernia from Hiberno tempore, that is, from the Winter season; others from Hiberus a Spaniard; and some againe from the river Iberus: the author of the booke entituled Eulogium, from Duke Irnalph: Postellus, a fancifull man, when he read Pomponius Mela publikely in Paris, because hee would seeme to have a reach beyond other men, fetcheth the originall thereof from the Hebrewes: so that Irin should bee as much as Iurin, that is, the Jewes land: The Iewes, forsooth saith he, being most wise Sages, and learned Philosophers, knowing by their learning that the Empire of the world should be setled in the strongest Angle, which lieth West, seized upon those parts, and Ireland with the first: The Syrians also and Tyri∣ans, to lay the foundation of their future Empire, endevoured all they could to inhabite those Regions. Pardon me I pray you if I dare not subscribe hereto, no nor give my consent to that opinion most received, as touching the Winter season aforesaid: al∣though I have read, that in this Iland the aire upon every winde is cold and win∣terlike. As for Hibernia, Iuverna, and Ouernia, they came doubtlesse from IER∣NA, spoken of by Orpheus and Aristotle : and the same Ierna, as also Iris, Yuerdhon, and Ireland, from Erin, the tearme that the inhabitants use. From this Erin there∣fore, a word proper unto the nation, the originall must be deduced. Here I, with those great Philosophers, that is, hold off and suspend my judgement: neither know I what to divine and ground my conjecture upon, unlesse peradventure that name may come from Hiere, an Irish word, which with them signifieth the West, or a Western coast; whence Erin may seeme to bee derived, as one would say, a Western countrey. Of this opinion have I been a good while since, induced there∣to with my owne conceit and flattering conjecture, both because it lieth furthest Westward of any region in all Europe (as being no more than twelve degrees di∣stant from the utmost West point) as also for that the river running in the most re∣mote West part of this Iland, is in Ptolomee called IERNUS, like as the Promonto∣rie or Cape bearing out farthest West in Spaine (from whence our Irish-men came) is named by Strabo IERNE, and as the next river unto it, which also is most West of all the rivers in Spaine, is called by Mela IERNA. Moreover, by reason of the We∣stern situation Spaine is named Hesperia, and that West Cape in Africk, Hesperium cornu, yea and even in Germanie these countries, Westrich, Westphalen, &c. have their denomination from that position and site: so that it is no marvaile if Ireland were tearmed Erin of the Western situation. Besides, these names of Ireland which I have spoken of, the Irish Bards or Poets have usually taken up in their ballads these tearmes, Tirvolas, Totidanan, and Banno, as the most ancient names of this Iland, but upon what reason I wot not, Bannomanna. unlesse Banno were that Bannomanna which Plinie men∣tioneth out of Timaeus, whiles his pen coasteth along the outmost sides and skirts of Europe, and the shore of the Northren Ocean on the left hand from Scythia, even as farre as Cadis in Spaine. For what countrey that same Bannomanna should bee, the Geographers have not yet found out But Biaun in Irish signifieth Sacred or Ho∣ly, and verily Festus Av enus calleth Ireland SACRAM INSULAM, The holy I∣land. Orae Maritimae. that is, The holy Iland, in that little booke intituled ORAE MARITIMAE, that is, The Sea coasts, which he compiled out of most ancient Geographers: namely, Hecataeus of Miletum, Hellanicus of Lesbos, Philaeus of Athens, Caryandaeus, Pausymachus of Samos, Dama∣stus, Euctemon, and others. But I will write downe his verses: for when he had spo∣ken of the Ilands Ostrymides, thus he versifieth: Ast hinc duobus in SACRAM, sic insulam Dixêre prisci, solibus cursus rati est. Haec inter undas multum cespitem jacit, Eamque latè gens Hibernorum colit. Propinqua rursus insula Albionum patet. But to the SACRED Isle (for so They us'd to call it long agoe) From hence a course who so desires, Just two dayes sailing it requires. Much turfe it casts the waves among, And Irish dwell therein along. Now very neere to it againe, The Albions Isle is kenned plaine. Ogygia. In his book De macu∣la in Luna, that is, Of the spot in the Moone. If that OGYGIA, which Plutarch placed on the West side of our Britaine were not , but , not a vaine dreame, but a matter in truth, hee may seeme by that name plainly to point at Ireland, although the reports that he so sadly telleth of it, be meer poeticall fictions & Milesian toies. Neither can any man readily tell, why they called it Ogygia ; unlesse haply of the antiquitie: For the Grecians tearmed nothing by the name of Ogygia but that which was very ancient. And Robert Constantine see∣meth to have shot wide all the world over, Isle Cerne. when he affirmeth that CERNE, men∣tioned in Lycophron, was our Ireland: for Lycophron himselfe, and Tzetzes that com∣menteth upon him, doe place Cerne toward the sunne rising: and all the best learned men thinke it to be Madagascar, situated as it were in another world, right under the Tropique of Capricorne, right over against Aethiopia. Thus much touching the names of Ireland, yet so, as we remember withall to take this by the way, that in these later times it was called also SCOTIA, Hibernia cal∣led Scotia. that is, Scotland by Isidor and Bede, of the Scots who inhabited it: and that thence the name of Scotland, together with the Scots themselves, came into Britaine. But of this we have spoken alreadie once before, and therefore have no cause to repeat here. This Iland is stretched out from South to North not broader than it is long, as Strabo hath recorded, but shaped in forme of a lentile, or an egge; nor of twentie dayes sailing, as Philemon in Ptolomee hath set it downe: but according to the later writers, The state of Ireland. it taketh up three hundred miles and no more in length, and is scarcely one hundred and twentie miles broad. On the East side it hath England severed from it with a troublous and tempestuous sea, which is called the Irish sea: on the West the huge maine Western Ocean; on the North the Deucaledonian sea, and on the South the Vergivian sea worketh upon it. The country, Giral. Cam∣brensis in To∣pographia Hi∣bernia. if you would heare Giraldus Cambrensis to speak, is uneven, full of hils, soft, waterish, and boggie, wild and overgrowne with woods, lying open to the winds, and so full of meeres or loghs, that a man may see ponds and standing waters even upon the mountaines. The aire (as Mela saith) is nothing good and favourable for ripening of corn: but the ground is so ranke of grasse, and the same not onely fresh and long, but sweet also withall, that the cattell may fill their bellies in a small piece of the day, and unlesse they be kept from grazing, Cattell. and not suffered to feed long together, their bellies will burst. Hence it is that they have such an infinite number of cattell, as being indeed the chiefe and principall wealth of the inhabitants, and many goodly flockes of sheepe, which they sheare twice a yeere, Irish mantles and rugges. Horses called Hobbies. Haukes. and make of their course wooll, rugges or shagge mantles, cad∣dowes also or coverlets, which are vented into forraine countries. They have like∣wise excellent good horses (we tearme them Hobbies ) which have not the same pace that other horses in their course, but a soft and round amble, setting one legge be∣fore another very finely. Their haukes also are right commendable, but these, as all other living creatures (besides men, women, and greyhounds) are smaller here than in England. Now as well the aire as the ground is excessive moist; whence it is that very many there be sore troubled with loosenesse, and rheumes, Diseases. but strangers espe∣cially: yet for the staying of the same they have an Uskebah. Aqua vitae of the best, which inflameth a great deale lesse, and dryeth much more than ours. Whereas Giraldus writeth, that those which are borne here sick en never of any of the three kinds of feavers, it is daily found by experience to be false. As for the land it selfe (that I may use the testimonie here of the said Giraldus ) it is of all countries most temperate; neither doth any frying heat of Cancer drive folke to seeke shade, nor chilling cold of Capricorne call them in to the fire: but all times in maner, by reason of the pleasantnesse and tempe∣rate disposition of the aire, have a gentle kinde of warmth. Of Bees there are such numbers, that they bee found not onely in hives, but also within the bodies of trees, and holes of the earth. Likewise it hath vines, but more for shade, Why grapes are not ripe in Britaine. than for any fruit they yeeld. For no sooner is the sunne passed out of Leo, but cold blasts here in this our climat are wont presently to follow, and in Autumne the after-noone heats are lesse effectuall and shorter, both here and in our Britaine, than to give the full and kinde ripening unto Grapes. Besides this, there is no snake in this countrey, nor any venemous thing whatsoever: howbeit much noisance they have every where by wolves. And that I may speake all at a word, whether a man respect the fertilitie of the soil, or the commodiousnesse of sea and havens, or the in∣habitants themselves, who are stout, hardie, warlike, wittie, proper men of bodie, and goodly feature, of a wondrous soft skin, by reason also of the tendernesse of muscles passing nimble; the Iland aboundeth in so many blessings, that Giraldus said not without just cause, That nature had cast into this Western kingdome of Zephirus, a more gracious eye than ordinarie. Now that otherwhiles there goeth of it an ill name, it is for that the inhabitants are in some places wilde and very uncivill, who in a mar∣vellous contrarietie of nature, both love idlenesse, and withall hate quietnesse: who al∣so are immoderately given to fleshly lust, and that over soone. For among the wil∣der sort they bestow their maidens in marriage, as ripe and readie for husbands, when they be once ten or twelve yeeres of age. Neither will they by any meanes stay for a competent maturitie of yeeres, a thing observed in all other countries. But as tou∣ching the manners and qualities of the Irish nation, I will discourse more at large in the end of this booke. And now, if it please you, give Ireland the hearing, whiles she speaketh of her selfe and her commodities, in these verses of that most learned man Hadrianus Iunius. Illa ego sum Graiis olim glacialis Ierne Dicta, & Iasoniae puppis bene cognita nautis: Quae Tarthessiaco propior se tingere soles Flumine conspicio, Cauro subjecta procaci: Cui Deus, & melior rerum nascentium origo Ius commune dedit cum Creta altrice tonantis, Noxia ne nostris diffundant sibila in oris Terrificae creti tabo Phorcynidos angues: Et fortè illati compressis faucibus atris Viroso pariter vitam cum sanguine ponant. En ego cum regni sceptro, Mavortia bello Pectora, & horriferas hominum, nil fingo, figuras, Qui cursu alipedes norint praevertere cervos, Dedico, piscososque lacus, volucrumque paludes Omnigenum lustris foetas, stannique fodinas, Et puri argenti venas, quas terra refossis Visceribus manes imos visura recludit. I am that frozen Isle, which Greekes once did Ierne call, Well knowne to Argo Jasons ship, and to her sailers all. Which subject unto Caurus curst have sunne more neer in sight, When in Tartessus floud he sets and seemes to drench his light. Whom God and better Nature hath secured from this feare (A gift imparted eke to Crete which Jupiter did reare) That snakes of grim Medusa's blood so filthie that were bred, Should dare in these my coasts to hisse, and hurtfull venome spred. And say, that some by chance there were brought thither of that brood, Throtled anon they lose at once their life with poison'd bloud. Lo here with regall scepter I present most martiall mindes, And dreadfull shapes (I fable not) of men who harts and hindes So swift of foot in running can out-strip and leave behind. With fishfull lakes besides and fennes, where fowles of everie kinde Their eiries have and harbours safe: moreover Delfes of tin, Rich Mines likewise of silver pure, which wondrous farre within The earth hath kept, whose bowels now digg'd up for men to prie, As if she meant even hell to see, she shew's them to the eye. Ireland why called Ogy∣gia. If that be true which the Irish Historiographers record, this Iland was not with∣out cause by Plutarch tearmed Ogygia, that is, very ancient. For they fetch the be∣ginning of their histories from the most profound and remote records of antiquitie, so that in comparison of them, the antientness of all other nations is but novelty, and, as it were, a matter of yesterday. They write that one Caesaria Noah his Niece, inha∣bited it before Noahs flood: Then that Bartholanus a Scythian came hither about three hundred yeeres after the said Noahs flood, and fought right doughtie battels with giants: That many yeeres after Nemethus a Scythian arrived here, and forth∣with was cast out by the Giants: After this, that Dela with certaine Grecians seized upon this Island; and soone after, that Gaothel with Scota his wife, daughter to Pha∣raoh King of Egypt landed here, and nominated after his wives name the Island Sco∣tia, and according to his owne name the language Gaothela ; and that, about the time of the Israelites departure out of Egypt. And the British historie reporteth how some few ages after, Hiberus and Hermion ( Ever and Erimon the Irish writers terme them) the sonnes of Milesius King of Spaine, by the sufferance of Gurguntius King of the Britans, planted colonies in this countrey, after it had beene dispeopled by a pestilence. My purpose is not either to averre these reports for true, nor yet to refute them: In such things as these let Antiquitie bee pardonable, and enjoy a pre∣rogative. Surely, as I doubt not but that this Island became inhabited even of old time, when as man-kinde was spred over all quarters of the world: so it is evident, that the first inhabitants thereof passed thither out of our Britaine: For (to say no∣thing of an infinite number of British words in the Irish tongue, together with the ancient names which favour of a British originall); Britans the first inhabi∣tants of Ire∣land. Little Britain. the natures of the people, and their fashions, as Tacitus saith, differ not much from Britain: of all ancient writers it is cal∣led A British Iland: Diodorus Siculus termed Irin a part of Britaine: and Ptolomee named the same BRITANNIA PARVA, that is, little Britaine, as you may see, if you list to compare his Geographickes with his book of Great Construction. And the Epi∣tome of Strabo calleth the inhabitants in plaine words, BRITANS: the old Geo∣graphers also named it The Britans Iland: yea and Festus Aveienus sheweth this out of Dionysius Afer, when he treateth of British Ilands, in these verses. Eminus hic aliae gelidi prope flabra Aquilonis Exuperant undas, & vasta cacumina tollunt, Hae numero geminae, pingues sola, cespitis ampli, Conditur occidui quà Rheni gurgitis unda, Dira Britannorum sustentant agmina terris. Here other Islands neere unto the chilling North winds blast, The waves of sea surmount aloofe, and shew their mountaines vast, In number twaine, their soile is fat, their ground both large and wide What way the Western Rhene his gulfe and waters deepe doth hide: These Lands fierce Britan troups maintaine, and thereon they abide. Neither is there any other countrey, out of which by reason of the vicinitie they might passe over more commodiously into Ireland than out of Britaine: from whence there is the like passage thither, in respect of the space of sea betweene, as is out of France into Britaine. But afterwards, when the Romanes had enlarged their Empire every way, many there were no doubt who out of Spaine, Gaule, and Britaine withdrew themselves hither, that they might shake off that intolerable yoke of the Romans slaverie: Neither do some otherwise understand these words of Tacitus: Ireland being situate in the middest betweene Spaine and Britanie, lying also very fitly for the French sea, would aptly have united, to the great use & advantage of the one and the other, the strongest members of the Empire together: the landing places and ports whereof, by entercourse of trafficke, were better known than those of Britain. And albeit Iulius Agricola also kept with him a pettie King or Prince of Ireland, who was driven thence by occasion of civill dissention, that hee might have the more advan∣tageous opportunitie thereby to invade the Island, which he thought would be sub∣dued and held with a legion, and a small power of aide forces; and was perswaded withall, that the same would availe much for the affaires of Britaine, in case the Ro∣man forces were planted everie where, and hope of libertie banished, as it were, farre out of sight: yet wee read not that the Romans gave any attempt that way. Not∣withstanding some are verily perswaded that they assaied the conquest of it, and doe gather the same hardly out of this place of Iuvenal. —Arma quid ultra Littora Iuvernae promovimus, & modò captas Orcadas, & minimâ contentos nocte Britannos? Why warred we past Irish coasts, and the Orkneis lately wonne, Beyond the Britans eke that have least night and longest Sunne? Yet the Panegyricall oration pronounced before Constantius the Emperour, implieth that Ireland was under his government: Britaine (saith he) is so recovered, that even those nations also which join upon the coasts of the same Island, are become subject and o∣bedient unto your command. Also we find written in the Chronicles of later historians, that Ireland, together with Britain and Thule, at the division of the Empire fell unto Constantine, Caesarea. the sonne of Constantine the Great. And that very fond fable of Caesa∣rea Noahs Niece, carrieth before it the name of Caesars, so as that therein may seeme covertly couched the comming of some Caesar into Ireland. Howbeit I can hardly perswade my selfe to beleeve, that this countrey at any time became subject to the Romans. Romane Conquests. But a blessed and happie turne had it beene for Ireland, if it had at any time beene under their subjection: surely, it had then beene reduced from barbarisme to civilitie. For wheresoever the Romans were victors, they brought them whom they conquered to civilitie: neither verily in any place else throughout Europe was there any civilitie, learning, and elegance, but where they ruled. And very inconsiderately also they may seeme to have neglected this Island. For from hence (to the plague and spoile of Britaine) brake out most dangerous enemies: which August seemeth to have foreseene, when he tooke so small care of Britaine, for the danger which hee presaged to hover and approach from the nations round about adjoyning. But when the Roman Empire began now to decay, the nation of the Scots or Scythians (for, in times past, as Strabo writeth, all people Westward were tearmed Celto-Scythae ) grew mightie in Ireland, and began to be renowned. Furthermore, under the Emperours Honorius and Arcadius it was inhabited by the Scottish nations, as Orosius hath writ∣ten. Whereupon Claudian living in the same age wrote thus: Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Ierne. Yce-frozen Ireland wept amaine, To see the Scots on heaps lye slaine. And in another place, —Totam cùm Scotus Hibernem Movit— What time as Scots did make, All Ireland armes to take. For from hence it was that the Scots made their forcible invasions into Britaine, and hither they were otherwhiles with great losses and overthrowes repulsed. But whence they came into Ireland, Ninnius a disciple of Elvodugus, an author of good antiquitie, shall enforme you by his own words; who lived, as himselfe witnesseth, in the yeere 830. under Anaraugh King of Anglesey and Guineth, or North-Wales. For after he had related, that in the third age of the world the Britans came into Britain, and in the fourth age, the Scythians or Scots into Ireland, hee proceedeth thus: Last of all came the Scots, Irishmen out of Spaine. In other copies Tholanus. from the parts of Spain into Ireland. But the first that arrived there, was Partholanus, with a thousand men and women together, and they grew after to be four thousand: and there fell a mortalitie among them, so that in one week they all di∣ed, and there remained of them not so much as one alive. The second that landed in Ire∣land was one Nemeth, the son of Aguomenes, who, by report, sailed upon the sea one yeere and an halfe: and afterward, when he had suffered shipwrack, fell with an haven in Ire∣land, and he returned into Spain. And after that came three sonnes of a Spanish knight, with thirtie Ciules with them, and in every Ciule thirtie wives; and they continued there for the space of one yeere. Last of all came Elam-Hoctor, and dwelt there with all his pro∣genie and generation, even to this day. With this Ninnius accordeth Henry of Hun∣tingdon. The Britans (saith he) in the third age of the world came into Britain, and the Scots in the fourth into Ireland. And how ever these reports be not most certaine, yet sure it is that they came out of Spaine into Ireland: and part of them departing thence, came and added a third nation unto the Britans & Picts in Britaine. The received opinion of the Irish is agreeable hereunto, for they most willingly acknowledge themselves to be an off spring of the Spaniards. Neither verily can it bee a marvaile, that a number of them withdrew themselves into Ireland out of the North part of Spaine, which, as S rabo writeth, is most barren, and wherein men live most miserably. Out of those words of Ninnius a man may see, that those entries made of Bartholanus and Nemethus, which fabu∣lously they fetch so farre off, out of most profound and remote antiquitie, are to bee drawne backe unto later times. Neither is it needfull for me to note againe, that this Island was of the Scottish inhabitants called SCOTIA. Not many yeeres after, these Scots in Ireland began to professe Christianitie, al∣though they would needs appropriate unto themselves that historie out of Rufinus, concerning the conversion of the Hiberians in Asia, and Celestin Pope of Rome sent unto these Scots Palladius the Bishop. Anno Christi 431. Palladius. Vincent. l. 9. c. 7 Whereupon Prosper Aquitanus writeth in this maner against Collator. Celestin delivered the Britans from the Pelagians heresie, when he secluded certain enemies of grace, who held their own native countrey, even from that unknown part of the Ocean: and having ordained a Bishop among the Scots, whiles he la∣bo red to keep an Iland of the Romans in the Catholike faith, he brought also a barbarous nation to be Christian. Yet Ninnius writeth, that Palladius being taken away by un∣timely death in Britaine, effected nothing: who also reporteth out of the Irish wri∣ters, that Christian religion was published and preached throughout Ireland by Saint Patrick. For he being a Britan borne, and that as some will in Cluidsdale, alli∣ed also to Sir Martin of Tourain, and a disciple of Saint German, was appointed suc∣cessour by Pope Celestin to Palladius deceased; who with so good successe taught and sowed the seed of Christian religion over all Ireland, that hee converted the greatest part by farre thereof unto Christ, and deserved the name of the Apostle of the Irish nation. Touching whom an ancient writer, Hierieus Ant siodorensis in his booke of Saint Germans miracles; For as much as (saith he) the glory of a Father ap∣peareth bright in the governance of his owne sonnes, among many sons whom we beleeve St. German had in Christ, and Disciples in religion, it shall suffice by way of compendi∣ous brevitie to insert here the mention of one only, and the same of all others most famous: namely Patricke, as the whole course of his acts declareth, the peculiar Apostle of the Irish nation, wholly addicted for 18. yeeres unto his most holy discipline, out of the veine of so worthie a fountaine drew no mean knowledge & learning in the heavenly scriptures. Whom also that most divine and godly Bishop, considering to be in religion magnanimous, in vertues excellent, and in learning powerfull: and deeming it meere folly, that so strong and able an husbandman should live idle in the tillage and ordering of the Lords corn ∣field, directed him unto holy Celestine Pope of Rome, by Segetius a Priest of his, who should give testimonie unto the Apostolicall See, of Ecclesiasticall honestie in the behalfe of that right excellent man. Being therefore approved with the judgment, supported with the au∣thoritie, and lastly strengthened with the blessing of him, he made a voiage into Ireland, and being peculiarly appointed an Apostle of that nation, as he then lightned them with his doctrine & miracles, so now also and for ever adorneth them with wonderful priviled∣ges of his Apostleship. Monks of Ire∣land holy men and learned. The Irish scholars of Patricke profited so notably in Christia∣nitie, that in the age next following, Ireland was tearmed Sanctoram-patria, that is, The native countrey of Saints ; and the Scottish Monks in Ireland and Britaine highly excelled for their holinesse and learning, yea and sent out whole flockes of most de∣vout men into all parts of Europe, who were the first founders of Luxeul Abbey in Burgundie, of Bobie Abbey in Italy, of Wirtzburge Abbey in Francland, of St. Gallus in Sweitzerland, of Malmesburie, Lindisfarn, and of many other Monasteries in Bri∣taine. For out of Ireland came Caelius Sedulius a Priest, Columba, Columbane, Colman, Aidan, Gallus, Kithan, Maidulph, Brendan, and many other celebrated for their holy life and learning. Of these Monkes is that Hieric above named of Auxerre to be un∣derstood, when he writeth thus to the Emperour Charles the Bald: What should I speake of Ireland, which setting light by the dangers of sea, flitteth all of it well neere with whole flockes of Philosophers unto our shores? of whom so many as are more skilfull and learned than the rest, doe voluntarily banish themselves, to attend dutifully upon the most wise Salomon, and be at his command. This Monasticall profession, although but then newly come up, was farre diffe∣rent in those daies from that of our time. They desired to be that indeed which they were named to be: they were farre from colourable dealing or dissembling: Erred they in any thing? it was through simplicitie, not through lewdnesse, much lesse of wilfull obstinacie. As for wealth and these worldly things, they so highly contem∣ned them, that they did not onely not seeke after, but also refused the same, though they were offered unto them descended by inheritance. For a notable apophthegme was that of Columbane (a Monke of Ireland) who, as the Abbat Walafride writeth, when Sigebert King of the Franckners dealt very earnestly with him, and that by way of many large and faire promises, that he should not depart out of his kingdome, answered him after the same sort, as Eusebius hath reported of Thaddeus, namely, That it be∣came not them to embrace other mens riches, Contempt of riches. who for Christs sake had forsaken their own. And the Bishops of Britain seemed no lesse to have despised riches, seeing they were so poore, that they had nothing of their owne. For, as we read in Sulpitius Severus, three Bishops of Britaine, in the Councell holden at Rimine, for want of their owne lived of the publick charges. The English Saxons also in that age conflowed and resorted from all parts into Ireland, as it were to the mart of good learning: and hence it is that we read so often in our writers, concerning holy men thus, Such a one was sent over into Ireland, for to be trained up in learning: and in the life of Sulgen, who flou∣rished 600. yeeres agoe. Exemplo patrum commotus, amore legendi, Ivit ad Hibernos, sophiâ, mirabile, claros. The fathers old he following, for love to read good works, Went unto Irish men, who were (O wonder) famous Clarkes. English Saxons seeme to have had their let∣ters and wri∣ting from the Irish. And from thence it may seeme our forefathers the ancient English learned the manner of framing their letters, and of writing; considering that they used the selfe same character, which the Irish commonly use at this day. And no cause have wee to marvaile that Ireland, which now for the most part is rude, halfe barbarous, and altogether voide of any polite and exquisite literature, was full of so devout, godly, & good wits in that age, wherein good letters through∣out all Christendome lay neglected and halfe buried, seeing that the divine pro∣vidence of that most gracious and almightie ruler of the world, soweth the seeds and bringeth forth the plants of sanctitie and good arts, Arts and pietie sowed among nations in sun∣dry ages. one whiles in one nation and o∣ther whiles in another, as it were in garden beds and borders, and that in sundry a∣ges: which being removed and translated hither and thither, may by a new growth come up one under another, prosper, and bee preserved to his owne glory, and the good of mankinde. But the outrage of warres by little and little quenched these hot affections and studies of holinesse and good literature. For in the yeere 644. after Christs nativi∣tie, Egfrid King of Northumberland with fire and sword made spoile and havocke of Ireland, a nation most friendly unto England; for which cause Bede chargeth him after a sort, in most grave and important tearmes. Afterward the Norwegians, under the leading of Turgese their Captaine, spoiled and wasted the countrey in most la∣mentable manner for the space of 30. yeeres: But when he was once slaine by a train and ambush laid for him, the inhabitants fell upon the Norwegians, and made such a bloodie massacre of them, that scarce any one survived to be a messenger of so great a slaughter. These Norwegians were no doubt those Normans, who, as Rhegino saith, in the time of Charles the great, setting upon Ireland, an Isle of the Scots, were by the Scots put to flight. Oustmanni, who haply are those that Ta∣citus nameth Aestiones, and Egivardus Aisti. After this the Oustmans, as one would say Esterlings, or Eastmen, came out of the sea-coasts of Germanie into Ireland; who having entred into certain Cities under the pretence of great trafficke, in a short space raised a most dangerous warre. About the very same time in manner, Eadgar that most puissant King of Eng∣land, conquered also a great part of Ireland: For thus we read in a certaine Charter of his: Unto whom God of his gracious favour hath granted, together with the Empire of England, dominion over all the kingdomes of the Isles lying in the Ocean, with their most stout and fierce Kings, even as farre as to Norway, yea and to subdue under the English Empire the greatest part of Ireland, with her most noble Citie Dublin. After these tempestuous forraine warres were allaied, there followed a most grie∣vous storme of civill dissention at home, which made way for the English to con∣quer Ireland. For Henrie the second King of England, taking occasion and oppor∣tunitie, by the privie dislikes, heart-burnings, and malicious emulations among the Irish Princes, grew into a serious deliberation with the Nobles of England, in the yeere of Salvation 1155. about the conquest of Ireland, for the behoof of his brother William of Anjou: But through the counsell of his mother Maude the Empresse, this project was rejected unto another time. Howbeit not many yeeres betweene, Der∣micius, Dermot Mac Morrog. the son of Murchard (Dermot Mac Morrog they call him) who reigned over the East part of Ireland, which in Latin is called Lagenia, and commonly Leinster, being for his tyrannie and lustfull leudnesse thrust out of his kingdome (for hee had ravished the wife of O Rorke, a pettie King of Meth ) obtained aide and forces of Hen∣rie the second King of England, to be restored into his kingdome againe: and made a covenant with Richard Earle of Pembroch, Richard Strongbow. surnamed Strongbow, of the house of Clare, that he for his part should aide him in the recovering of his Kingdome, and that himselfe would assure unto the Earle, together with his daughter Eva, the said Kingdome in succession after him. Hereupon the said Earle having forthwith muste∣red up and raised an armie of Welsh and English together, and joined unto him to accompanie him in the warres, the Fitz-Giralds, Fitz-Stephans, and other Gentle∣men out of England and Wales, restored his father in law Dermot into his former Kingdome againe: and within few yeeres gat by conquest so great a part of Ireland into his owne hands, that his power became now suspected to the King of England; who by proclamation, and that with grievous menaces, recalled home the said Earle and his followers out of Ireland, and unlesse they obeyed without delay, pronounced them traitours, and their goods confiscate. Whereupon the Earle granted unto the King by covenant and writing, whatsoever he either inherited in right of his wife, or won with his sword, and as his tenant in vassailage received from him the Earldomes of Weisford, Henrie the se∣cond entreth Ireland. Ossorie, Caterlogh, and Kildare, with certain Castles. Then King Henrie the second, having gathered a power together in the yeere of Christ 1172. sailed over in∣to Ireland, and obtained the Princely title of soveraigne rule of the Iland. For the States of Ireland passed over unto him all their rule and power, Girald. Camb and a Manu∣script in the hands of Ba∣ron Houth. namely, Rothericke O Conor Dun, that is, The Browne, Monarch of Ireland, Dermot Mac Carti King of Corke, Donald O Bren King of Limi icke, O Carell King of Uriel, Macshaglin King of Ophaly, O Rorke King of Meth, O Neale King of Ulster, with the rest of the Nobles and their people, and the same under their Charters sub∣scribed, signed, delivered, and transmitted to Rome. Which was ratified and confir∣med moreover by a Patent of Pope Hadrian, by a ring delivered unto him in token of his investiture, and also by the authoritie of certaine Provinciall Synods. This King Henrie afterward delivered up the Seigniorie of Ireland, into the hands of his sonne Iohn ; which conveiance Pope Urban confirmed by his Bull, and in testimonie of his confirmation sent him a Coronet of Peacocks feathers broided and embroidered with gold. Whom, after hee was once established in his Kingdome, divers authors af∣firme to have granted by his Charter or Patent, Ireland and England both unto the Church of Rome, to be held of it ever after in fee, and to have received it againe from the Church, as a Feudatarie: also to have bound his successours to pay three hundred Markes unto the Bishop of Rome: But that most worthie and famous Sir Thomas Moore, who tooke the Popes part even unto death, affirmeth this to be false: For hee writeth that the Romanists can shew no such grant; that they never demanded the foresaid money, and that the Kings of England never acknowled∣ged it. But by his leave, as great a man as hee was, the case stood otherwise, as evi∣dently appeareth by the Parliament Records, the credit whereof cannot bee im∣pugned. For in an assembly of all the States of the Realme, in the reigne of Edward the third, the Lord Chancellour of England proposed and related, that the Pope would judicially sue the King of England, as well for the Homage as the tribute, which was to be yeelded for England and Ireland, to the performance whereof King Iohn in times past had obliged himselfe and his successours: and of this point which hee put to question, required their opinion. The Bishops desired to have a day by them selves for to consult about this matter: the Nobles likewise and the people or Com∣munaltie. The day after, they all met, and with one generall accord ordained and enacted: That for asmuch as neither King Iohn, nor any other King whatsoever, could im∣pose such servitude upon the Kingdome, but with the common consent and assent of a Par∣liament; which was not done: and whatsoever he had passed was against his oath at his coronation by him in expresse words religiously taken before God: Therefore in case the Pope should urge this matter, they were most readie, to the uttermost of their power, to resist him resolutely with their bodies and goods. They also who are skilfull in scanning and sifting everie pricke and tittle of the lawes, cry out with one voice, That the said Grant or Charter of King Iohn was voide in Law, by that clause and reservation in the end thereof; Saving unto us and our heires, all our Rights, Liberties, and Regalities. But this may seeme beside my text. Ever since King Johns time, the Kings of England were stiled Lords of Ireland, un∣till that King Henrie the eighth in the memorie of our fathers was in a Parliament of Ireland, by the States thereof declared King of Ireland, because the name of Lord seemed in the judgement of certaine seditious persons, nothing so sacred and full of majestie as the name of King. This name and title of the Kingdome of Ireland were by the Popes authoritie (what time as Queene Marie in the yeere 1555. had by her Embassadours in the name of the Kingdom of England tendred obedience unto the Pope Paul the fourth) confirmed in these words. To the laud and glorie of almightie God, and his most glori∣ous mother the Virgin Mary: to the honour also of the whole Court of heaven, and the ex∣altation of the Catholike faith, as the humble request and suite made unto us by King Philip and Queen Marie about this matter, wee, with the advice of our brethren, and of plenarie power Apostolicall by our Apostolicall authoritie, erect for ever Ireland to bee a Kingdome, and endow, dignifie, and exalt with the title, dignitie, honour, faculties, rights, ensignes, prerogatives, preferments, preeminencies royall, and such as other Realmes of Christians have, use, and enjoy▪ and may have, use, and enjoy for the times to come. And seeing that I have hapned upon those Noblemens names, who first of all Eng∣lish gave the attempt upon Ireland, and most valiantly subdued it under the imperiall crowne of England, lest I might seeme upon envie to deprive both them and their posteritie of this due and deserved glorie, I will set them downe here out of the Chancerie of Ireland, according as the title doth purport. The names of them that came with Dermot Mac Morrog into Ireland. Richard Strongbow Earle of Pembroch, who by Eve the daughter of Morrog the Irish pettie King aforesaid, had one only daughter, and she brought unto William Ma∣reschall the title of the Earldome of Pembroch, with faire lands in Ireland, and a goodly issue, five sonnes, who succeeded one another in a row, all childlesse: and as many daughters, which enriched their husbands, Hugh Bigod Earle of Norfolke, Guarin Montchensey, Gilbert Clare Earle of Glocester, William Ferrars Earle of Der∣by, and William Breose, with children, honours, and possessions. Robert Fitz-Stephen. Harvey de Mont-Marish. Maurice Prendergest. Robert Barr. Meiler Meilerine. Maurice Fitz-Girald. Redmund nephew of Fitz-Stephen. William Ferrand. Miles de Cogan. Richard de Cogan. Gualter de Ridensford. Gualter and sonnes of Maurice Fitz-Girald. Alexander sonnes of Maurice Fitz-Girald. William Notte. Robert Fitz-Bernard. Hugh Lacie. William Fitz-Aldelm. William Maccarell. Humfrey Bohun. Hugh de Gundevill. Philip de Hasting. Hugh Tirell. David Walsh. Robert Poer. Osbert de Herloter. William de Bendenges. Adam de Gernez. Philip de Breos. Griffin, nephew of Fitz-Stephen. Raulfe Fitz-Stephen. Walter de Barry. Philip Walsh. Adam de Hereford. To whom may be added out of Giraldus Cambrensis, Iohn Curcy. Hugh Contilon. Redmund Cantimore. Redmund Fitz-Hugh. Miles of S. Davids, and others. The Government of the Kingdome of Ireland. E Ver since that Ireland became subject unto England, the Kings of Eng∣land have sent over thither, to manage the state of the Realme, their Re∣gents or Vice-gerents, The Vice-roies of Ireland. whom they tearmed in those writings or letters Patents of theirs (whereby authoritie and jurisdiction is committed un∣to them) first, Custodes, or Wardens. Keepers of Ireland: then afterwards, according as it pleased them, Iustices of Ireland, Lievtenants, and Deputies. Which authoritie and jurisdiction of theirs is very large, ample, and royall; whereby they have power to make warre, to conclude peace, to bestow all Magistracies and Offices, except a ve∣ry few; to pardon all crimes, unlesse they be some of high treason, to dub Knights, &c. These letters Patents, when any one entreth upon this honourable place of go∣vernment, are publikely read, and after a solemne oath taken in a set forme of words before the Chancellour, the sword is delivered into his hands, which is to be borne before him; he is placed in a chaire of estate, having standing by him the Chancellour of the Realme, those of the Privie Councell, the Peeres and Nobles of the king∣dome, with a King of Armes, a Serjeant of Armes, and other Officers of State. And verily there is not (looke throughout all Christendome againe) any other Vice-Roy that commeth neerer unto the majestie of a King, whether you respect his jurisdi∣ction and authoritie, or his traine, furniture and provision. There bee assistant unto him in counsell, the Lord Chancellour of the Realm, the Treasurer of the Kingdome, and others of the Earles, Bishops, Barons, and Judges, which are of the Privie Coun∣cell. For Ireland hath the very same degrees of States that England hath, The states of Ireland. namely, Earles, Barons, Knights, Esquires, &c. The Courts of Justice, or Tribunals of Ireland. THe supreme Court of the Kingdome of Ireland is the Parliament, which at the pleasure of the Kings of England is usually called by the Deputie, and by him dissolved: although in the reigne of King Edward the second, a Law was enacted, Parliamentum claus. anno 12. The Tribunals of Ireland. That every yeer there should be Parliaments holden in Ireland, which seemeth yet not to have been effected. There be likewise foure Tearmes kept, as in England, yeerely: and there are five Courts of Justice; The Star-chamber, the Chancerie, the Kings Bench, the common Pleas, and the Exchequer. There are also Iustices of Assises, of Nisi prius, and of Oyer and Determiner, according as in England: yea and Iustices of Peace in every countie, for the keeping of peace. Moreover, the King hath his Serje∣ant at law, his Atturney Generall, his Sollicitour, &c. Over and besides, in the more remote Provinces there be Governours to minister Justice; as a principall Commissioner in Connaught, and a President in Mounster: who have to assist them in Commission certaine Gentlemen and Lawyers, and yet every of them are directed by the Kings Lievtenant Deputie. As for the common lawes, Ireland is governed by the same that England hath. For we read in the Re∣cords of the Kingdome thus: King Henry the third, in the 12. yeere of his reigne, gave commandement to his Iustice of Ireland, that calling together the Archbishops, Bishops, Barons, and Knights, he should cause there before them to be read the Charter of King Iohn; which he caused to be read accordingly, and the Nobles of Ireland to be sworn, as touching the observation of the lawes and customes of England, and that they should hold and keepe the same. Neverthelesse the meere Irish did not admit them, but retained their owne Brehon lawes and leud customes. And the Kings of England used a conni∣vence therein upon some deepe consideration, not vouchsafing to communicate the benefit of the English lawes, but upon especiall grace to especiall families or sects; namely, the O Neales, O Conors, O Brien, O Maloghlins, and Mac Murough, which were reputed of the blood roiall among them. The Parliamentary or Statute lawes al∣so of England being transmitted, were usually in force in Ireland unto the time of K. Henrie the seventh. For in the tenth yeere of his reign, those were ratified & confir∣med by authoritie of Parliament in Ireland, in the time of Sir Edw. Poinings govern∣ment, but ever since they have had their Statutes enacted in their owne Parliaments. Besides these civill Magistrates, they have also one militarie officer, named the Mare∣shal, who standeth here in great stead, to restrain as well the insolencie of souldiers, as of rebels, who otherwhiles commit many & great insolencies. This office the Barons de Morley of England bare in times past by inheritance, as appeareth by Records for King John gave it to bee held by right of inheritance, Mareshall of Ireland. in these very expresse words, We have given and granted unto Iohn Mareschal for his homage and service, Anno 9. R. Io∣hannis. our Mare∣shalship of Ireland, with all appurtenances. We have given also unto him for his homage and service, the Cantred in which standeth the towne of Kilbunny, to have and to hold un∣to him and his heires of us and our heires. From whom it descended in the right line to the Barons of Morley. This Mareshall hath under him his Provost Marshall, and sometime more than one, according to the occasions and troubles of the time, who exercise their authoritie by limitation under the great seale of Ireland, with instructi∣ons. But these, and such like matters, I will leave to the curious diligence of others. Touching the order of justice and government among those more uncivill and wilde Irish, I will write somewhat in place convenient, when I shall treat of their manners. THE DIVISION OF IRELAND. Division of Ireland. I RELAND, according to the maners of the inhabitants, is divided into two parts: for they that refuse to be under lawes, and do live without civilitie, are termed the Irishry, and commonly the Wild Irish: but such as being more civill do reverence the authoritie of lawes, and are wil∣ling to appeare in Court, and judicially to be tried, are named English-Irish, and their country goeth under the tearm of The English Pale, because the first Englishmen that came thither did empale for themselves certaine limits in the East part of the Iland, and that which was most fruitfull: Within which there bee even at this day, those also that live uncivilly enough, and are not very obedient unto the lawes: like as others without the pale are as courteous and civill as a man would de∣sire. But if we look into higher times, according to the situation of the country, or the number rather of governors in old time, it containeth five portions (for it was some∣times a Pentarchie ) namely, Mounster Southward: Leinster Eastward: Connacht in the West: Ulster in the North: and Meth, well neere in the very middest. In Mounster are these Counties, Kerry. Desmond. Cork. Waterford. Limiricke. Tipperary, with the county of holy Crosse in Tipperarie. In Leinster be these Counties, Kilkenny. Caterlough. Queenes County. Kings Countie. Kildare. Weishford. Dublin. In Meth are these Counties, East Meath. West Meath. Longford. In Connaght are these Counties, Clare Galloway. Majo. Slego. Letrim. Roscoman. In Ulster be these Counties, Louth. Cauon. Fermanagh. Monaghan. Armagh. Doun. Antrim. London-Derry. Tir-Oen. Tir-Conell, or Do∣negall. The Ecclesiasticall State of Ireland was ordered anciently by Bishops, Ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction. whom ei∣ther the Archbishop of Canterburie consecrated, or they themselves one another. But in the yeere 1152. as we read in Philip Flatesburie, Christianus Bishop of Lismore Legate of all Ireland, held a most frequent and honourable Councell at Mell, where∣at were present the Bishops, Abbats, Kings, Captaines, and Elders of Ireland. In which, by authoritie Apostolicall, and by the counsell of Cardinals, with the con∣sent of Bishops, Abbats, and others, there in Consistorie he ordained foure Archbi∣shopricks in Ireland, Armach, Dublin, Cassile, and Tuem or Toam. The Bishopricks which were Diocessans under these, seeing that now some of them are by the covetous iniquitie of the times abolished, others confounded, and conjoined, others againe translated another way, I am disposed here to put downe (according as they were in old time) out of an ancient Roman PROVINCIALL, faith∣fully exemplified out of the originall. Under the Arch-Bishop of Ar∣magh, Primate of all Ireland, are the Bishops of Meath, or— Elnami∣rand. Dune, alias— Dunda∣lethglas. Chlocor, otherwise — Lugundun. Conner. Ardachad. Rathbot. Rathluc. Daln-Liquir. Dearrih or Derri . Clo macnois. Dromor. Brefem. To the Archbi∣shop of Dublin are subject the Bishops of Glendelach. Fern. Ossery, alias— De Canic. Lechlin. Kil-dare or Dare. Under the Arch∣bishop of Cassile are the Bishops of Laonie, or— De Kendal∣nan. Limric. The Isle Gathay. Cellumabrath. Melite or of Emileth. Rossi, alias Roscree. Waterford, alias— De Baltifordian. Lismore. Clon, alias — De Clua∣nan. Corcage, that is, Cork. De Rosalither. Ardefert, or Kerry. Unto the Arch∣bishop of Tuam or Toam are sub∣ject the Bishops of Duac, alias— Kil∣macduoc. Mage. Enachdun. De Celaiar. De Rosconmon. Clonfers. Achad, or Achonry Lade or Killaleth. De Conany. De Kilmunduach. Elphin. MOMONIA, or MOUNSTER! M OMONIA, in Irish Mown, and in ordinarie construction of speech Wown, in English Mounster, lieth Southward open to the Vergivian sea; separated in some place from Connaght by the river Siney or Shanon, and elsewhere from Lemster by the river Neor. In times past it was divided into many parts, as Towoun, that is, North Mounster, Deswoun, that is, South Mounster; Hier woun, that is, West Mounster; Mean woun, that is, Middle Mounster ; and Urwoun, that is, The Front of Mounster: but at this day into two parts, that is, into West Mounster, and South Mounster. In the West Mounster there dwelt in old time the LUCENI, the VELABRI, and UTERINI: in the South, the OUDIAE or VODIAE, and the CORIONDI: but at this day it is distinguished into seven Counties, Kerry, Desmund, Corke, Limiric, Tipperary, Holy Crosse, and Waterford. Where Ireland lieth out most Westward, and treanding toward the Cantabrian Ocean, looketh afarre off Southwest, with a large interspace, to Gallitia in Spaine, there inhabited in old time the VELABRI and LUCENI, as Orosius writeth. The LUCENI of Ireland (who may seeme to have had their name and beginning from the LUCENSII of Gallitia, Luceni. in the opposite coast of Spaine, and of whose name some reliques still remain in the Barony of Lyxnaw ) were seated as I suppose in the Coun∣tie of Kerry, and in Conoglogh hard by upon the banke of the river Shanon. THE COUNTIE OF KERRY. T He Countie of Kerry neere unto the mouth of Shanon, runneth forth like a little tongue into the sea, beaten on with barking bil∣lowes on both sides: a country mounting aloft with wooddy, wild, and solitarie mountaines: between which there lye many vallies, in some places garnished with corn-fields, in others beset also thicke with woods. This is reputed a Countie Palatine, and the Earles of Desmond had in it the dignitie and priviledges of a Count-Palatine, and that by the bountifull gift of K. Edward the third, who granted unto them all Re∣gall liberties, except foure pleas, namely, of Burning, Rape, Forstall, and Treasure trouue, with the profit growing de Croccis, reserved for the Kings of England. But through the licentious iniquitie of the men, who neither would nor knew how to use this liber∣tie, it became of late a very sinke of mischiefes, and a common receptacle for rebels. In the entrance into this countrie there is a territorie called Clan-Moris, Clan-Morys. of one Mo∣ris descended from the stocke of Raimund le Grosse, whose heires successively were called the Barons of Lixnaw. A little river now namelesse (which the situation in some sort implieth to be DUR in Ptolomee ) cutteth through the midst of this, The river Dur. run∣ning by Trayley a small towne, laid now in manner desolate, (where the Earles of Desmund had an house. Bishoprick of Ardart. ) Hard by standeth Ardart, where the Bishop called of Arde∣fert, a poore one God wot, hath his poore See. In the farthest point well neere of this, where it maketh a promontorie, Dingle. there sheweth it selfe on the one side Dingle, a com∣modious port, Smerwic. on the other side Smerwic Sound a road for ships, for so they tearme it short in steed of S. Mary-wic: at which of late, when Girald Earle of Desmund, a man notorious for deep treacherie to his Prince and countrey, wickedly wasted Mounster with continuall harrying and raising booties out of the fields, there arrived certaine companies of Italians and Spaniards, sent under-hand to aide him from Pope Grego∣rie the thirteenth, and the King of Spaine; who here fortifying a place which they called Fort del Ore, made their bragging bravadoes, and thundred out many a terrible threat. Arthur Baron. Grey. But the most noble and martiall Baron, Arthur Lord Grey, Lord Deputie, with his very comming and first onset that he made upon them, decided the matter, and ended the quarrell. For immediately they yeelded themselves, and the most part of them were put to the sword, which was in policie thought the wisest and safest course, considering in what ticklish tearmes the state of this Realme then stood, and how the rebels in every place were up in armes. And the Earle of Desmund himselfe at length in his fearefull flight being forced to take the woods hard by for his refuge, was soone after in a poore cottage by a souldier or two rushing in upon him, 1583. first wounded, and afterwards being knowne, cut shorter by the head, and so paid worthi∣ly for his perfidious treason, and the wasting of his countrey. Here some man happily would thinke it not correspondent to the gravity of this worke, A ridiculous conceit. if I should but relate what a ridiculous opinion hathfully possessed the minds of a number of the Irishry, yea and perswaded them verily to beleeve that he who in that barbarous Pharoh and out cry of the Souldiers, which with great strai∣ning of their voice they use to set up when they joine battaile, doth not cry and hout as the rest doe, is suddenly caught up from the ground, and carried as it were flying in the aire, into these desert vallies, out of any country of Ireland whatsoever: where he eateth grasse, lappeth water, knoweth not in what state he is, good or bad, hath some use of reason but not of speech, but shall be caught at length with the help of hounds and the hunters, and brought home to their owne homes. DESMONIA, or DESMOND. B Eneath those ancient LUCENI lieth DESMOND, stretched out farre and wide toward the South, called in Irish Deswown, in Latine Des∣monia, inhabited in ancient times by the VELLABRI and IBERNI, which in some copies are written UTERINI. Velabri. As for these VELABRI, they may seeme so named of ABER, that is, salt water washes, for that they dwelt upon such Friths, divided one from another by many and those notable armes of the sea running betweene: whence also the Artabri and Cantabri in Spaine had their denomination. Among these armes of the sea, three promontories, beside Kerry aforesaid, with crooked and winding shoares run out into the Southwest, and those the inhabitants tearmed in old time Hierwoun, that is, West-Mounster. The first of them betweene Dingle bay and the river Mair, is named Clan-Car, and hath a ca∣stle built at Dunkeran by the Carews of England. In this dwelt Donald Mac Carty More, a Lord of the Irish blood, who in the yeere 1566. resigned up unto Queen Eli∣zabeths hands his possessions and lands, 1565. and tooke them againe of her, to hold the same after the English manner by fee, Barons of Va∣lentia. Barle Clan-Ca r. doing homage and fealtie. And at the same time he was created Baron of Valentia (an Island adjoining) and Earle of Clan-car. A man in this tract of great name and power, a most deadly foe in times past of the Fitz-Giralds, who disseized his ancestours, Kings (as hee stifly avoucheth) of Des∣mond, of their ancient seat and habitation. But long enjoied not hee this honour: and having but one onely daughter legitimate, he matched her in marriage with Flo∣rence Mac Carty, and departed out of this life an aged man. The second promontorie enclosed within two baies, Maire and Bantre, is named Beare, Beare. standing for the most part upon hungry gravell, and a leane stony soile: In which live O Swillivant Beare, O Swilivant. and O Swillivant Bantre, descended both of one and the same stocke, men of great nobility in their country. The third is called Eraugh, lying betweene Bantre and Balatimore or Baltimore, a Bay or Creeke passing well knowne by reason of the abundance of Herrings taken there: whereunto resorteth every yeere a great fleet of Spaniards and Portugals, even in the mids of winter, O Mahon. to fish for Cods. In this the O Mahons by the beneficiall gift of M. Carew received faire lands and Lordships. This is that Ptolomee calleth NOTIUM, Notium Pro∣montorium. The river I r∣nus. that is, the South-Promontorie, at this day named Missen-head, under which (as we may read in him) the river IERNUS is disgorged into the Ocean. But what name the said river now hath, in so great obscurity I hardly dare divine, un∣lesse it be that which they call Maire, and runneth hard under Dunk-eran aforesaid. Neither wot I how to ghesse at those people, whom the same Ptolomee placeth up∣on these promontories, seeing that according to the varietie of copies they have sun∣dry names, as IBERNI, OUTERNI, IBERI, and IVERNI, unlesse peradventure, like as their neighbours the LUCENI and CONCANI did, they flitted hither from among the Iberi of Spaine. Well, this name of Desmond in the foregoing ages stret∣ched farre and wide in this tract, even from the sea unto the river Shanon, and was called also South-Mounster. Earles of Des∣mond. The Fitz-Giralds descended out of the house of Kildare, having subdued the Irish, became Lords here of very large and goodly possessions: and of them Maurice Fitz-Thomas (unto whom T. Carew heire unto the Seigniory of Desmond, had before passed away his right of Desmond ) was in the third yeere of King Edward the third created the first Earle of Desmond. Among whose posterity many there were, great men for their valour and wealth, whose credit also and re∣putation reached farre. But a bad name there went, and still doth, of James; who having excluded his nephew from the inheritance, entred himselfe by force upon it, and imposed upon the people those most grievous tributes of Coyne, Livery, Cocher∣ings, Bonaghty, &c. for the maintenance of Galloglasses and Souldiers to spoile and harry the countrey. Which when his sonne Thomas exacted and gathered of the poore people, hee was by the commandement of John Tiptoft Deputy Lievtenant beheaded in the yeere 1467. and so suffered due punishment for his owne and his fa∣thers wickednesse. Howbeit when his children were restored againe, in their off∣spring this honour continued, and descended in right of inheritance unto Girald that rebell, whom erewhile I named, who wilfully overthrew a most noble and potent fa∣mily. And when hee was attainted by Parliamentary authority, Desmond was ad∣judged and annexed to the Crowne land, reduced into the ranke of counties, and a Sheriffe was ordained to governe it from yeere to yeere. Neverthelesse in the last rebellion the rebells erected a titularie Earle; and against him Queene Elizabeth granted the title of Earle of Desmond unto Iames Fitz-Girald, sonne to the foresaid rebell, who shortly after died issuelesse in the yeere 1601. They that herein beare the greatest name and most puissance are of the race of the Giraldines, or Fitz-Giralds, although they have for sundry respects assumed unto themselves divers sir∣names. VODIAE, and CORIONDI. A Fter the Iberi, Vodiae a people. there dwelt farre in the countrey the , who are tearmed also VODIAE, and UDIAE: the footing of which name doth more expresly shew it selfe in Idou and Idouth, two small territories: like as the name of CORIONDI, Coriandi a peo∣ple. in the countie of Corke bordering upon them. These nations inhabited the counties of Corke, Tipperary, Limericke, and Wa∣terford. COMITATUS CORCAGIENSIS, commonly called THE COUNTY OF CORK. T He County of Corke, which in old time was reputed a Kingdome, comprised the whole tract along the sea from Lismore unto Saint Brend, where it affronteth Desmond Westward, hath in the midland parts thereof Mu keray, Muskeray. a wild and woody country; wherein Cormac Mac-Teg is of great name: and toward the sea coast Carbray, Carbray. in which the Mac-Carties beare the most sway. By the sea side, the first place that we meet with is Rosse, a road and port in times past well frequented, but now lesse resorted unto by reason of a bar of sand. From thence with a narrow neck runneth out a biland, called the Old head of Kinsale, neere unto which the family of the Curcies flourished in an∣cient times, famous for their wealth; descended from a brother of Iohn Curcy the Englishman that subdued Ulster ; and out of which there remaineth here still Curcy Baron of Ringrom ; but at this day (this is the world) of weak and meane estate. Af∣ter it, at the mouth of the river Bany, in a fertile soile and well woodded, standeth Kinsale, a very commodious port, and a towne fortified with old walls: under which in the yeere 1601. the kingdome of Ireland lay a bleeding, and put it was upon the hazzard, as it were, of one cast of a die, whether it should be subject to England or Spaine: what time as the Iland was endangered both with forraine and domesticall warre, Spaniard lan∣ded in Ireland, and from thence driven. and eight thousand old trained souldiers under the conduct of Don Iohn D' A∣quila, had of a sudden surprized and fortified it, confident upon the censures and ex∣communications of Pius the fifth, Gregorie the thirteenth, and Clement the eighth, Popes of Rome, discharged like thunderbolts upon Queene Elizabeth, and presu∣ming confidently upon the aides of rebells, who had sent for them, under a goodly shew of restoring religion (which in this age and variance about religion, is every where pretended for to maske and cloak most ungracious and wicked designes.) But Sir Charles Blunt Baron Mountjoy, L. Deputy, presently belaied it round about both by sea and land, albeit his souldiers were tired, toiled out, and the season of the yeere most incommodious, as being midwinter: and withall, made head also against a rab∣ble of rebels, whom the Earle of Tir-Oen, O-Donel, Mac-Gwyre, and Mac-Mahound had raised and gotten thither; and with such valour and fortitude so fortunately daun∣ted and repressed their malapert boldnesse, that with one victory hee both had the towne with the Spaniards in it yeelded unto him, and also wrested, as it were, out of the hands of all Ireland throughout, now at the point of revolt, (for they that delibe∣rate are revolted already) both sword and fire. On the other side of the river from Kinsale lieth Kerry-Wherry, Kerry-wher∣ry. a little territorie of late belonging to the Earles of Des∣mond. Just before which runneth the river that Ptolomee calleth DAURONA, Giral∣dus Cambrensis, by changing onely one letter, Sauranus and Saveranus, which issu∣ing out of Mu kerey mountaines, passeth along by that principall Citie of the coun∣tie, graced with an Episcopall dignitie (whereunto is annexed the Bishops See of Clon ) which Giraldus nameth Corragia, Englishmen Corke, and the naturall inhabi∣tants of the country Coreach: enclosed within a circuit of walls in forme of an egge, with the river flowing round about it and running betweene, not passable through but by bridges, lying out in length, as it were, in one direct broad street, and the same having a bridge over it: Howbeit a pretty towne of merchandise it is, well peopled, and much resorted unto; but so beset on every side with rebels neighbouring upon it, that they are faine to keepe alwaies a set watch and ward, as if they had continu∣all siege laid unto their Citie, and dare not marrie their daughters forth into the country, but make marriages one with another among themselves; whereby all the Citizens are linked together in some degree or other of kinred and affinity. The re∣port goeth that Brioc that most devout and holy man (who in that fruitfull age of Saints flourished among the Gauls, and from whom the Diocesse of Sanbrioch in Britaine Armorica, commonly called S. Brieu tooke the name) was borne and bred here. Beneath Corke the river parting in twaine, environeth a large and very pleasant Iland, over against the principall dwelling house of that most ancient and noble fa∣mily of the Barries, which thereupon is called Barry Court. For that family is deri∣ved from Robert de Barry an Englishman, a personage of great worth, and renow∣ned: who notwithstanding chose rather among the first to be chiefe indeed, than to seeme chiefe; who in the winning of Ireland received wounds and hurt, and the first man he was in Ireland that manned and brought the Hawk to hand. His posterity by their long ap∣proved loyaltie and martiall prowesse, deserved to receive of the Kings of England, first the title of Baron Barry, Vicount Bu∣tiphant. afterwards of Vicount Butiphant, & for their great lands and wealth, gat among the people the sirname Barry more, that is, Barry the great. Below Barry-court, the river Saveren, hard by Imokelly a faire possession long since of the Earle of Desmond, loseth it selfe in the Ocean, affording at the very mouth com∣modious harbours and havens. As Saveren watereth the neather part of this countrey, so Broodwater, called in times past Aven-more, that is, The great River, moisteneth the upper: upon which inhabiteth the Noble family of Roch, Baron Roch Vicount Fermoy. which being transplanted out of England hath growne up and prospered here very well, and now enjoieth the title of Vicount Fermoy. Certaine it is, that in the reigne of Edward the second, they were enti∣tuled with the honour of Parliament-Barons, considering that George Roch was fined in two hundred Markes, because upon summons given, hee came not to the Parliament at Dublin: where Broodwater (which for a good while runneth as a bound between this county and the county of Waterford ) entring into the sea maketh an ha∣ven, standeth Yoghall ; Yoghall. no great towne, but walled round about, built in fashion some∣what long, and divided into two parts: the upper, which is the greater part, stretch∣ing out Northward, hath a Church in it, and without the wall a little Abbey which they call North Abbey: the neather part reaching Southward, called the Base-towne, had also an Abbey called South Abbey ; and the commodiousnesse of the haven, which hath a well fensed Kay belonging unto it, The Kay. and the fruitfulnesse withall of the country adjoining, draweth Merchants unto it, so as it is well frequented and inhabited, yea and hath a Mayor for the head Magistrate. Thus farre in these daies reacheth the countie of Corke, The kingdome of Corke. which in times past, as I said even now, was counted a kingdome, and went farther, as which contained with∣in it Desmond also. This kingdome King Henry the second gave and granted unto Sir Robert Fitz-Stephen, and to Sir Miles de Cogan in these words: Know yee that I have granted the whole kingdome of Corke, excepting the City and Cantred of the Oust∣mans, to hold for them and their heires, of mee and Iohn my sonne, by the service of 60. knights. And the Carews of England were heires to that Fitz-Stephen, from whom Sir George Carew, now Baron Carew of Clopton, lineally and directly deriveth his descent, who not long since was the Lord President of Mounster, and in some of these obscure Irish matters (which I willingly acknowledge) hath directed me by the light of his knowledge. THE COUNTY OF WATERFORD. O N the East coast of Ireland the county of WATERFORD extend∣eth it selfe between the rivers Broodwater West, Shour East, the Ocean from the South, and the county of Tipperary Northward: a goodly country, as well for pleasant site as fertile soile. Upon Broodwater, so soone as it hath left Corke county behinde it, Lismor. Christian a Bi∣shop. Lismore sheweth it selfe, well knowne for an Episcopall See in it, where Christian sate sometime the Bishop, and Legate of Ireland about the yeere 1148. a Prelate that deserved passing well of the Irish Church, trained in his youth at Clarevall in the same cloister with St. Ber∣nard and Pope Eugenius. But now, since that the possessions in manner all have beene alienated, it is united unto the Bishopricke of Waterford. But neere unto the mouth of the said river, stand∣eth Ardmor a little towne, so called because it standeth neere the sea, of which, and of this river Necham long since versified thus. Urbem Lisimor pertransit flumen Avenmor, Ardmor cernit ubi concitus aequor adit. Ard-mor. The river named Aven-Mor through Lismor towne doth runne, Ardnor him sees, and there apace to sea he speeds anon. The little territory adjoining unto it is called Dessee, Dessee. the Lord whereof, one of the family of Desmond, received in our remembrance the honourable title of Vicount Dessee: but for that he had no issue male, it vanished with him in a short time. Not farre from hence standeth Dungarvan upon the sea, Dungarvan. a towne well fortified with a castle, and as commodious by reason of the roade for ships: which together with the Baronie of Dungarvan King Henry the sixth bountifully granted unto John Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury: but afterward, seeing it stood handsomely to that part of Mounster which was to be brought under and reduced to order, it was by authority of Parliament annexed to the Imperiall Crowne of the Kings of England for ever. Neer unto it flourished the Poers of ancient nobility (from the very first time that Ire∣land was conquered by the English) and afterward advanced to the honourable title of the Barons of Curraghmore. Poers Barons of Curragh∣more. Waterford. But upon the banke of the river Suyr, Waterford the chiefe and principall city of this county maketh a goodly shew. Concerning which old Necham writeth in this wise. Suirius insignem gaudet ditare Waterford, Aequoreis undis associatur ibi. The river Suyr hath great desire, Faire Waterford rich to make: For in this place he hies apace, His course with sea to take. This city which the Irish and Britans call Porthlargy, the English Waterford, was built by certaine Pirates of Norway; and although it standeth in an aire somewhat grosse, and upon a soile not very fruitfull, and the streets therein bee with the narrowest, thrust close and pent together; yet such is the convenience and commodiousnesse of the haven, that for wealth, fresh trading, and frequent resort it is the second City in all Ireland, and hath alwaies shewed a singular loialty, fidelitie, and obedience to the Imperiall Crowne of England. For ever since that Richard Earle of Pembrok wanne it, it hath continued so faithfull and quietly disposed, that it performed at all times safe and secure peace unto the English on their backes, whiles they went on in the conquering of Ireland. Whence it is that the Kings of England have gran∣ted unto it very many, and those right large Franchises, which King Henry the se∣venth augmented, and confirmed, because the Citizens had demeaned themselves most valiantly and wisely against that Mock-Prince Perkin Warbeck, who being a young man of base condition, by hoising up the full sailes of impudence went about to mount up aloft unto the Imperiall diadem, whiles he a meer suborned counterfeit tooke upon him to be Richard Duke of Yorke, the second sonne of King Edward the fourth. Earle of Wa∣terford. This countie of Waterford together with the city, King Henry the sixth gave un∣to Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury aforesaid, by these words, which because they te∣stifie the valerous vertue of that most martiall Knight, to the end that vertue might have the due honour thereto belonging, I thinke it worth my labour, and haply any man else would deeme no lesse, to put downe out of the Record; which may be Eng∣lished thus. We therefore, saith the King, (after other eloquent termes penned by the Secretaries of that age, when there was but simple Latin) weighing with due consideration the valiant prowesse of our most deere and faithfull cousin, John Earle of Shrewsbury and of Weisford, Lord Talbot, Furnivall, and Le Strange, sufficiently tried and ap∣proved even unto his old age in the warres aforesaid, upon his body no lesse bedewed with sweat many a time than embrued with blood; and considering in what sort our Countie and Citie of Waterford in our land of Ireland, the Castle, Seigniory, Honour, Land, and Baronie of Dungarvan, and all the Lordships, Lands, Honours, and Baronies with the pertinences within the same County, which by forfeiture of rebels, by reversion or de∣cease of any person or persons, by escheat, or any other title of law ought to come into our hands or our progenitors, or in the same to be by reason of the hostile invasions of our ene∣mies and rebells in those parts, are become so desolate, and lye so much exposed to the spoiles of warre, wholly as it were wasted, that they turne us to no profit, but have and doe redound oftentimes to our detriment: in this regard also, that by the same our Cou∣sin our foresaid land of Ireland may the more valiantly be defended in those parts against such attempts and invasions of our enemies and rebells, doe ordaine, promote, and cre∣ate him Earle of Waterford, together with the stile, title, name, and honour thereto be∣longing. And because as the highnesse of his state and degree groweth, all things conse∣quently of necessity grow withall, upon our speciall grace, certaine knowledge, and meere motion, and for the estate of the Earle himselfe our Cousin to be maintained in more decent manner, we have given, granted, and by these our letters confirmed unto the same Earle the County aforesaid, together with the foresaid stile, title, name, and honour of Earle of Waterford; yea and the foresaid City, with the fee ferme of the same, the Castles, Lordships, Honours, Lands and Baronies, with the pertinences within the County: like∣wise all and every sort the Manors, Hundreds, Wapentakes, &c. all along the sea coast, from the towne of Yoghall unto Waterford City aforesaid, To have and to hold the foresaid County of Waterford, the stile, title, name, and honour of Earle of Waterford, and the City Waterford aforesaid, the Castle, Seigniory, Honour, Land, and Barony of Dungarvan, and all other Lordships, Honours, Lands and Baronies within the said county: as also all and every the foresaid Manors, Hundreds, &c. unto the above named Earle and the heires males issuing out of his body (to have I say and to hold) of us and our heires, by homage, fealty, Steward of Ireland. and the service of being and to be our Seneschall or Steward, and that his heires be the Seneschals of Ireland to us and our heires, throughout our whole land of Ireland, to do and that hee doe, and ought himselfe to doe in the same his office, that which his predeces∣sors Seneschals of England were wont to doe hitherto in that office, for ever. In witnesse whereof, &c. But when as (whiles the Kings of England and the Nobles, who had large and goodly possessions in Ireland, were much busied and troubled a long time; first, with the warres of France, and afterward with civill warres at home) Ireland lay in man∣ner neglected, and the State of English there falling still to decay, was now in man∣ner come to nothing: but the Irishry, by occasion of the others absence, grew excee∣ding mighty: for to recover these losses, and to abate the power of the Irish, it was ordained and enacted by the States of the Realme in Parliament, An. 28. H. 8. that the Earle of Shrewsbury, for his absence and carelesnesse in maintaining of his owne, should sur∣render into the hands of the King and his successors the Earledome and towne of Waterford: the Duke of Norfolke likewise, the Baron Barkley, the heires generall of the Earle of Ormond, and all the Abbats, Priors, &c. of England, who had any lands, should surrender up all their possessions unto the King and his successors for the same absence and neglect. THE COUNTY OF LIMERICK. H Itherto have wee gone over the Maritime counties of Mounster: two there remaine yet behind that bee in-lands, Limericke and Tipperary, which wee are now to goe unto. The county of LIMERICK lieth behinde that of Corke Northward, betweene Kerry, the river Sha∣non, and the county of Tipperary. A fertile countrey, and well peo∣pled, but able to shew very few places of any good account and importance. The more Western part of it is called Conilagh ; Conilagh. Knoc-Patric. wherein among the hills, Knock-Patric, that is Patricks hill, mounteth up of a mighty height, and yeelding a pleasant prospect into the sea, beholdeth afarre off the river Shanon, falling with a wide and wast mouth into the Vergivian or Ocean. Under which hill a sept of Fitz-Giralds, or Giral∣dines, lived honourably a long time, Knight of the Valley. Anno 11. Reg. Eliz. untill that Thomas, called the Knight of the Val∣ley, or of the Glin, when his gracelesse sonne that wicked firebrand suffered death (for to set villages and houses a fire is by the lawes of Ireland high treason) because him∣selfe advised his sonne, and set him on to enter into these lewd actions, by authority of the Parliament was disseized of his goodly and large possessions. The head City of this county is Limerick, which Shanon, a most famous river, by parting his chanell compasseth round about. The Irish call it Loumeag, Limirick. and the English Limirick. A Bishops See this is, and a very famous mart towne of Mounster ; first forcibly won by Reimundo the Grosse, an Englishman, the sonne of William Girald, afterwards burnt by Duvenald an Irish petty King of Thuetmond: and then in processe of time Philip Breos an Englishman was enfeoffed in it, & King John fortified it with a castle. At this day it is counted two townes. The upper (for so they call it) wherein stand the Cathedrall Church and the castle, hath two gates opening into it, and each of them a faire bridge unto it of stone, with bulwarkes and little draw bridges: the one leading into the West, the other into the East, unto which the nether towne joineth, fensed with a wall, with a ca∣stle also thereto, and a foregate at the entrance into it. More into the East standeth Clan-William, Clan-William. so named of the sept or kinred of William, who came out of the family de Burgo (the Irish call it Burke ) which dwelleth therein: and out of which house Queene Elizabeth conferred upon William, who slew Iames Fitz-Moris that tempe∣stuous troubler of his country, Baron of Ca∣stle Conell. the title and honour of Baron of Castle-Conel, (where Richard the Red Earle of Ulster, had strengthened a castle) together with a yeerly pen∣sion, as a reward of his valour, and to his comfort and meed for the losse of his sonnes, slaine in that encounter. In the South part of this county is Kil-Mallo, the second towne next to Limirick both for wealth and for number of inhabitants, enclosed also with a wall about it: likewise Adar, a little towne in old time fortified, standing upon the same river; which streightwaies emptieth it selfe into Shanon: Clan-Gibbon. hard unto which lieth Clan-Gib∣bon, the Lord whereof Iohn Fitz-Girald, called Iohn Oge Fitz-Iohn Fitz Gibbon, and for the gray haires of his head, The white Knight, was attainted by Parliament for his wicked acts: but his sonne through the clemency of Queene Elizabeth was restored to his full estate. Of great note and name above the rest in this tract, be∣sides those Bourks, 13. Elizab. Fitz-Geralds. Giraldines, and Fitz-Giralds, are the Laceys, Browns, Hurleys, Cha∣ceys, Sapells, and Pourcels, all of the English race: also the Mac-Shees, Mac-Brien O-Brian, &c. of Irish breed. THE COUNTY OF TIPPERARY. T He county Tipperary Westward is bounded with Limirick-shire afore∣said and the river Shanon, Eastward with the county of Kilkenny, toward the South with the counties of Corke and Waterford, and North with the territorie of the O-Carolls. The South part is an exceeding fertile coun∣try, and yeeldeth corne abundantly, furnished also sufficiently with good and frequent buildings. The West part of it the river Glason passeth through, and watereth with a long course: Emely. not farre from the banke whereof standeth Emely, or Awne, a Bishops See, which hath beene in times past, by report, a City very popu∣lous and of great resort. Through the midst of it runneth the noble river Shower, or Swire, The lower Os∣sery. which streaming out of Bladin hill, speeding through the lower Ossery (which by the bountifull favour of King Henry the eighth entituled the Butlers Earles of Ossery ) and through Thurles, which honoureth them with the dignity of Vicounts, first goeth unto Holy Crosse, a right famous Abbey in times past (whence the country also adjoining is commonly termed the Countie of the Holy Crosse of Tipperary ) and enjoieth certaine peculiar freedomes, The county of Holy Crosse of Tipperary. Wood of the Crosse. granted in honour of a piece of Christs crosse there sometimes preserved. The whole world (saith Saint Cyrill ) is full of peeces of this wood, and yet by a continuall miracle (as Paulinus saith) it hath never beene im∣paired. Thus were Christians perswaded in ancient times. And incredible it is what a con∣fluence there is even yet of people continually upon devotion hither, as unto an holy place. So firmely doth this nation persevere in the old Religion of their forefathers, which the carelesse negligence of their Prelates, and ignorance together, hath be∣yond all measure encreased, when as there be none to instruct and teach them other∣wise. Then Shour passeth beside Cassile, Cassile. beautified with an Archiepiscopall digni∣ty by Engenius the third Bishop of Rome, which had under it in times past many Bi∣shops as Suffragans. From thence runneth the river downe, sprinkling Islands here and there in the way, and fetcheth a compasse about Cahir Castle: which out of the family of the Butlers hath a Baron advanced to that dignity by Queene Eliza∣beth: Baron de Ca∣hir. but his sonne stained himselfe with perfidious disloialty, and suffered for it, when as the Castle was by the Earle of Essex taken in the yeere 1599. and him∣selfe cast into prison. Clomell. Then holding on his course by Clomell, a mercate towne well frequented and fensed, as also by Carick Mac-Griffin, situate upon a rock, whereof al∣so it tooke name (the habitation of the Earles of Ormond, which together with the honour of Earle of Carrick King Edward the second granted unto Edmund Boteler or Butler ) it leaveth Tipperary behinde it, Earle of Ca∣ricke. Anno 9. Ed. 2. and serveth in steed of a limit to confine the Counties of Waterford and Kilkenny. Thus much of the places in the South side of this county. As for that which lieth Northward, leane it is and very barren, peaking up with high tops of mountaines, and twelve above the rest, as it were, hudled up together, which they terme Phelem∣ge Modona. Ormond. This part in Latin is called Ormondia, in Irish Orwowon, that is, the Front of Mounster, in English Ormond, and most men name it very corruptly Wormewood. All the name and glory whereof ariseth from the Earles, Butlers Earles of Ormond. Anno 2. Ed. 3. of whom there hath beene a number since Iames Butler, upon whom and his heires King Edward the third con∣ferred this title of honour for terme of life, with the Roialty also and other liberties with Knights fees in the county of Tipperary, the which his posterity through the favour of the Kings of England still enjoy: whence this County is reputed Palatine, and he of some was stiled Earle of Tipperary. Earle of Tip∣perary. The ancesters of this James were in old time the Butlers (an honourable office) of Ireland; and from thence came this sirname Le Boteler or Butler imposed upon them: and certaine it is that they were linked in most neere alliance unto St. Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury (as who derive their descent from his sister): and that af∣ter hee was murdered, they were by King Henry the second removed into Ireland, who supposed that hee should disburden himselfe of the worlds hatred for that fact, in case he advanced the kinsfolkes and allies of the said Thomas to rich revenues and high honours. The first Earle of Ormond in this family, was James sonne to Edmund Earle of Carricke, who wedded the daughter of Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford, whom he had by a daughter of King Edward the first: and here was his first step unto this honour. Hereupon James his sonne by this marriage came to be commonly named among the people, The noble Earle. The fifth Earle of these named James (that I may not stand particularly upon every one) received at the hands of King Henry the sixth the title and honour of Earle of Wiltshire, to him and to the heires of his body: who being Lord Deputy of Ireland, as divers others of this race, and Lord Treasurer of England, standing attainted by King Edward the fourth, was straight waies ap∣prehended and beheaded: but his brethren John and Thomas, likewise proclaimed traytors, kept themselves close out of the way: John died at Jerusalem without issue. Thomas, through the speciall favour of King Henry the seventh, was in the end re∣stored to his blood: who departed this life in the yeere 1515. leaving behinde him two daughters, Anne married to Sir Iames de sancto Leodegano, called commonly Sel∣lenger ; and Margaret unto Sir William Bollein, who bare unto him Sir Tho. Bollein: whom King Henry the eighth created first Viscount Rochfort, afterwards Earle of Wiltshire and of Ormond, and afterward took Anne Bollein his daughter to wife; who brought forth for England Queene Elizabeth, a Prince of most happy memory, and with all thankfulnesse to be alwaies remembred by the English and Irish. When Tho∣mas Bollein was dead leaving no issue male, Sir Pierce Butler, a man of great power in Ireland, descended of the Earles race, whom Henry the eighth had before time created Earle of Osserie, attained also to the title of Ormond, and left the same unto his sonne James, who had issue by the daughter and heire of James Earle of Desmond a sonne named Thomas Earle of Ormond now living; whose faith and loyaltie hath been passing well tried and approved in many troubles and dangerous affaires: who also hath joined in marriage his only daughter unto Theobald Butler his brothers son, whom King James hath advanced lately to the title of Vicount Tullo. Whereas some of the Irish, Wolf-men. and such as would be thought worthy of credit, doe af∣firme, that certaine men in this tract are yeerely turned into Wolves: surely I sup∣pose it be a meere fable: unlesse haply through that malicious humour of predomi∣nant unkind Melancholy, they be possessed with the malady that the Physicians call , The disease Lycanthropia. which raiseth and engendereth such like phantasies, as that they imagine themselves to bee transformed into Wolves. Neither dare I otherwise affirme of those metamorphosed Lycaones in Liveland, concerning whom many Writers deli∣ver many and marvellous reports. Thus farre as touching the Province of Mounster, for the government whereof Queene Elizabeth, when shee bethought herselfe most wisely, politickly, and princely, which way she might procure the good and wealth of Ireland, ordained a Lord President to be the reformer and punisher of inconsiderate rashnesse, the dire∣ctor also and moderator of duty, together with one Assistant, two learned Lawyers, and a Secretary: and the first President that shee made was Sir Warham S. Leger Knight, a man of great experience in Irish affaires. LAGENIA, or LEINSTER. T He second part of Ireland, which the inhabitants call Leighnigh, the Bri∣tans Lein, the English Leinster, and Latine writers Lagenia, and in the ancient lives of the Saints, Lagen, lieth all of it on the Sea-side Eastward, bounded toward Mounster with the river Neor (which notwithstanding in many places it passeth beyond) on Connaght side for a good space with Shanon, and to∣ward Meath with the peculiar knowne limits. The Countrey is fertile and fruitfull, the aire most milde and temperate, and the people there inhabiting come neerest of all other to the gentle disposition and civill conversation of England their neighbour Iland, from whence they are for the most part descended. In Ptolomees dayes therein were seated the BRIGANTES, MENAPII, CAUCI, and BLANI: and peradventure from these Blani are derived and contracted these later and moderne names, Lein, Lei∣nigh, and Leinster. But now it is divided into the Counties of Kilkenny, Caterlogh, Queenes County, Kings County, Kildare, Weisford, and Dublin: to say nothing of Wicklo and Fernes, which either be already, or else are to be laid thereto. BRIGANTES, or BIRGANTES. T He BRIGANTES seeme to have planted themselves betweene the mouth of the river and the confluence of Neor and Barrow, which in Ptolomee is called BRIGUS. Now because there was an ancient City of the Brigantes in Spaine, named BRIGANTIA, Florianus del Campo laboureth tooth and naile to fetch these BRIGANTES out of his owne countrey Spaine. But if such a con∣jecture may take place, others might with as great probality derive them from the Bri∣gantes of Britaine, a nation both neere and also exceeding populous. But if that be true which I finde in certaine copies, that this people were called BIRGANTES, both hee and the other have missed the marke: For, that these tooke their denomination of the ri∣ver BIRGUS, about which they doe inhabite, the very name is almost sufficient to per∣swade us. These BRIGANTES, or BIRGANTES, whether you will, dwelt in the Counties of Kilkenny, Ossery, and Caterlogh, watered all with the river BIRGUS. THE COUNTIE OF KILKENNY. County of Kil∣kenny. T He Countie of Kilkenny is bounded West with the countie of Tipperary, East with the counties of Weisford and Caterlogh, South with the coun∣tie of Waterford, North with Queenes Countie, and Northwest with upper Osserie. A countrey that with townes and castles on every side maketh a very goodly shew, and for plenty of all things surpasseth the rest. Neere unto Osserie the mighty and huge mountaines Sleiew Bloemy, which Giraldus calleth Bladinae Montes, with their rising toppes mount up to a wonderfull heigth: out of the bowels whereof, as from their mothers wombe, issue the rivers Shour afore∣named, Neor, and Barrow: which running downe in severall chanels, before they enter into the Ocean joine hand in hand all together, whereupon they in old time tearmed them The three sisters. The Neor, commonly called also Neure, runneth in manner through the midst of Kilkenny county: Upper Ossery. Baron of upper Ossery. and when it is passed with a forward course by the upper Osserie, the first Baron whereof was Barnabas Fitz-Patrick, promoted to that honor by King Edward the sixth, and hath watered many fortresses on both sides, floweth beside Kilkenny, which is as much to say, as the Cell or Church of Canic ; which for the sancti∣mony of his solitary life in this country, was highly renowned: a proper, faire, and wealthy Burrough towne this is, and far excelling all other midland Boroughs in this Iland: divided into the Irish towne and the English towne. The Irish towne is, as it were, the Suburbs, and hath in it the said Canicks Church, which both gave name un∣to it, and now also affordeth a See unto the Bishop of Osserie. But the English towne is nothing so ancient, built, as I have read, by Ranulph the third Earle of Chester, and fortified with a wall on the West side by Robert Talbot a Nobleman, and with a ca∣stle by the Butlers. And sure it is that in the division of lands between the daughters of William Mareschal Earle of Penbroch, it fell unto the third daughter, whom Gil∣bert Clare Earle of Glocester married. Somewhat beneath the same Neore, standeth a little walled towne, named in Eng∣lish Thomas Towne: Thomas Towne. in Irish, Bala-Mac-Andan, that is, The towne of Antonies sonne: For it tooke both names of the founder Thomas Fitz-Anthonie, an Englishman, who flourished under King Henry the third, whose heires are yet acknowledged the Lords thereof. Callan. Beneath this towne the river Callan voideth his streame into Neore: upon which standeth the third Burrough or incorporate towne of this county, bearing the same name Callan. Inis Teog. Like as Inise-Teog, which is the fourth. The family of Butlers hath spread and branched farre and wide throughout this County, men that with much honour bare a great port, and for their worth and ver∣tues were adorned with the titles of Earles of Carick, Ormond, Wiltshire in England and of Ossorie, as is before said: and at this day there remaine of their line, beside the Earle of Ormond, Vicount Thurles, and Knight of the Order of Saint George, Vicount Montgarret, Vicount Tullo, the Barons of Dunboyn and of Cahir, a goodly race also and progenie of Noble Gentlemen. The rest of the Gentry in this Tract that are of better birth and parentage be likewise of English descent, as the Graces, Walshes, Lo∣vells, Foresters, Shortels, Blanch-felds, or Blanchevelstons, Drilanas, Comerfords, &c. THE COUNTY OF CATERLOGH. T He County of CATERLOGH, by contraction Carlogh, toward the Sunne rising adjoineth to the County of Kilkenny, wholly, in manner, situate be∣tweene the rivers Barrow and Slane ; of a fertile soile and shaded well with woods; hath two townes in it of better note and importance than the rest, both standing upon the West banke of Barrow: namely, Caterlogh, which Leonel Duke of Clarence began to wall; and Bellingham a most renowned Lord Deputy fortified with a castle; Also Leighlin, called in Latine Lechlinia, where there was an Episcopall Chaire, now united to the See of Fernes. These townes have both of them their wards or garrisons, and Constables over them. And whereas the greatest part of this County belonged in right of inheritance unto the Howards Dukes of Norfolke (who by the Earles of Warren drew their descent from the eldest daughter of William Mareschall Earle of Penbroch ) King Henry the eighth by a gene∣rall consent of the States of the Realme tooke unto himselfe, The Statute of Absenties. both from them and also from other Noblemen, yea and from Monasteries in England, all their lands and possessions in Ireland; for that the Lords thereof by neglecting in their absence their owne private estates carelesly, brought therewith the publike state into danger, as is already shewed. From hence Barrow passeth through the Baronie Ydron, Barony Ydron. which by right belonged to the Carews: for Sir John Carew an English Knight, died seised thereof in the time of King Edward the third: and which Peter Carew within our memorie recovered, as it were by a writ of remitter, after it had been unlawfully usurped, and a long time in the occupation of unjust detainers. Upon the river Slane appeareth Tullo, memorable in this regard, that King James hath lately honoured Theobald Butler, the Earle of Ormonds brothers sonne, with the title of Vicount Tullo. Cavanaghs. The Cavanaghs dwell a great many of them every way hereabouts, who being descended from Dovenald a younger sonne, as they say, the Bastard of Dermot the last King of Leinster, are spred and branched out into a very great sept or linage, a warlike generation renowned for their good horse-man∣ship, and who as yet, though they bee exceeding poore, beare themselves in spi∣rit answerable to their ancient nobilitie. But being at deadly feud amongst them∣selves, for I wot not what man-slaughters, which many yeeres agoe they commit∣ted one upon another, they daily work their owne mischiefe by mutuall wrongs and hurts. When as the English had set some of these to oversee and mannage the pos∣sessions they had in this part of Ireland, about King Edward the seconds time, they by little and little usurped the whole country unto themselves, and assumed the name of O-Mores, O More. Out of a pam∣phlet of Pa∣trick Finglas. and taking into their societie the Toles and Brenes, by little and little dis∣seized the English of all the territorie betweene Caterlogh and the Irish sea. Among these is the confluence of Neore and Barrow, which after they have tra∣vailed in a joint streame some few miles from hence in one channell, present both their name and their waters unto their eldest sister the Shour, which straightwaies is swallowed up at a mouth full of rockes within the gulfe of the Ocean: where on the left hand there shooteth out a little promontorie with a narrow necke, that sheweth a prettie high tower unto the sailers, Hook-Tower. erected by the merchants of Rosse, what time they were in their prosperity, for their direction and safer arrivall at the rivers mouth. QUEENES COUNTIE. A Bove Caterlogh, toward the North-west there spreadeth out a little country full of woods and bogs, Lease. named in Irish Lease, and QUEENES Countie in English: which Queene Mary ordained to be a Countie, by Commission given unto Thomas Ratcliffe Earle of Sussex, then Lord Deputie, who reduced it into the tearmes of civill order and governement: whence it is that the chiefe towne thereof is called Mary-Burgh: Mary Burgh. where certaine garrison souldiers with their Seneschall keep ward, and have much adoe to defend themselves against the O-Mores (who beare themselves as the ancient Lords thereof) against Mac-Gilpatric, the O-Dempsies, and others, a mischievous and tumultuous kind of people, who daily practise and plot all they can to annoy the English, and to shake off the yoke of lawes. For to subdue this wilde and hostile part of the countrey, at the first entrie of the English thither, Meilere was sent: For whom Hugh Lacie gover∣nour of Ireland erected one Castle at Tahmelio, like as a second at Obowy, a third likewise upon the river Barrow, and a fourth at Norrach. But among the rest, he for∣tified Donemaws, Donemaws. an ancient Castle standing in the most plentifull part of the terri∣torie, which came hereditarily unto the Breoses Lords of Brecknocke, by Eua the younger daughter of William Mareschall Earle of Pembroch, and what way as Bar∣row, which rising out of Slew Blomey hills Westward, runneth solitarie alone amongst the woods, Rheba. he visiteth that ancient RHEBA, mentioned by Ptolomee, which keeping the name still intire is called at this day Rheban: but insteed of a citie it is altogether, as one saith, , that is, A citie citilesse, or, The remaines of that which was a citie ; even a few little cottages with a fortresse. Notwithstanding it giveth the title of a Baronet unto that Nobleman Nicholas of Saint Michael, the Lord thereof, who is commonly called the Baronet of Rheban. Baronet of Rheban. KINGS COUNTIE. L Ike as the Queenes Countie aforesaid was so named in honour of Queene Marie, so the territorie bordering next unto it Northward, divided with Barrow running betweene, Offaly. and called in times past Offalie, was in honour of Philip King of Spaine her husband, tearmed Kings Countie, Philips towne. and the principall towne in it Philips Towne ; where is placed a Se∣neschall with a ward: and divers Gentlemen of English blood are here planted, namely, the Warrens, Her-berts, Colbies, Mores, and Leicesters: amongst the I∣rish septs of O-Conor, unto whom a great part hereof in old time belonged; Mac-Coghlan, O-Maily, Fox, and others stand stoutly in defence of the lands wonne by their ancestors, and left unto them. Now these naturall Irish inhabitants grumble and complaine that their livings and patrimonies have beene taken from them, and no other lands assigned and set out for them to live in: Hence it is that taking hold of every occasion to make uprores, they put the English dwelling among them to much trouble ever and anon: yea and oftentimes in revengefull minds festered and poisoned with hostile hatred, they breake out furiously into open and actuall rebel∣lions. THE COUNTY OF KILDAR. O Ver against these all along Eastward, affronteth the county of Kildar a most rich and plentifull country: concerning the pastures whereof Giraldus Cam∣brensis useth these verses of Virgill. Et quantum longis carpunt armenta diebus, Exiguâ tant m gelidus ros nocte reponit. And looke how much when daies are long the beasts by grasing eat, So much cold dewes make good againe by night when 'tis not great. The chiefe and head towne of the shire is Kildar, Kildar. S. Brigid. much honoured and graced in the first infancy of the Irish Church, by reason of Saint Brigid a Virgin right ve∣nerable and highly esteemed of for her devotion and virginity (I meane not that Bri∣gid which about 240. yeeres agoe erected that order of the sisters or Nunnes of Saint Brigid: namely, that within one Monastery both Monkes and Maidens should live, divided asunder by walls, and suffered onely one to see another) but another Bri∣gid of greater antiquity by farre, as who was a Disciple of Saint Patricke, of great fame and renowne throughout Ireland, England, and Scotland. Whose miracles and fire never going out, but kept by Nunnes, as it were, in that secret Sanctuary of Vesta, and of the ashes that never encrease, are mentioned by writers. This Kildar is adorned with an Episcopall See, named in the Popes letters in old time, Episcopa∣tus Darensis. After the entrance of the English into Ireland, it was the habitation of Richard Earle of Pembroch, then of William Mareschall his sonne in law, that married his daughter, Earle of Penbroch likewise: by whose fourth daughter Sibyll it came to William Ferrars Earle of Derby, and by his daughter likewise begotten of her, unto William Lord Vescy: whose sonne William Vescy, Lord chiefe Justice of Ireland, standing in termes of disfavour and disgrace with King Edward the First, for certain quarrels arising between him and John the sonne of Thomas Fitz-Girald, and being bereft of his only sonne lawfully begotten, granted and surrendred Kildare and other his lands in Ireland unto the King, so that he might enfeoffe his base sonne surnamed De Kildare, in his other lands in England. And a little while after, the said John sonne of Thomas Fitz-Girald, whose ancesters (descended from Girald Winde∣sor, Castellan of Pembroch ) had with passing great valour performed most painefull service in the conquest of this Iland, Ch. 9. Ed. 2. N. 12. was by Edward the second King of England endowed with the castle and towne of Kildar, together with the title and name of Earle of Kildar. These Fitz-Giralds, or as they now tearme them, the Giraldines, are a right noble family, and for their exploits highly renowned: by whose valour, as one said, The Englishmen both kept the sea coasts of Wales, and also forced and won the walls of Ire∣land. And verily this house of Kildare flourished a long time without taint of honour and name (as which never bare armes against their Prince) untill that Thomas Fitz-Girald, the sonne of Girald Fitz-Girald Earle of Kildare, and Lord Deputy of Ire∣land under King Henry the eighth, hearing that his father sent for into England, and accused for misgoverning Ireland, was put to death; upon this light and false rumour, unadvisedly and rashly carried away with the heat of youth, put himselfe into armes against Prince and countrey, solicited the Emperour Charles the fifth to enter and seize upon Ireland, wasted the land farre and neere with fire and sword, laid siege to Dublin, and killed the Archbishop thereof: For which outrages shortly after he with five of his unkles were hanged, when his father for very sorrow was dead before. Howbeit Queene Mary restored the family unto their blood and full estate, when shee advanced Girald brother unto the aforesaid Thomas to bee Earle of Kildare, and Baron of Offaly. He ended this life about the yeere 1558. His eldest son Girald died before his father, leaving one onely daughter married to Sir Robert Digby: Henry his second sonne succeeded, who when he had by his wife L. Francis daughter to Charles Earle of Nottingham only two daughters, William the third son succeeded in the Earledome, who was drowned in passing into Ireland in the yeere 1599. having no issue. And then the title of Earle of Kildare came to Girald Fitz-Girald sonne to Edward their Unkle, who was restored to his blood in linage to make title by descent lineall or collaterall from his father and brother, and all his ancestours, any attaindour or corruption of blood to the contrary notwithstanding. There be also in this County these places of better note than the rest; Naas a mer∣cate towne, Athie upon the river Barrow, Mainoth a castle belonging to the Earles of Kildare, and a towne unto which King Edward the first, in favour of Girald Fitz-Moris granted a mercate and Faire: Castle Martin, the chiefe seat of the family of Fitz-Eustace ; which descending from the Poers in the County of Waterford, for their valour received the honour of a Parliament-Barons, Barons Fitz-Eustace. Pat. 2. Ed. 4. bestowed upon Rowland Fitz-Eustace by King Edward the fourth, together with the Manour of Port-lester, and the title of Vicount Baltinglas, at the hands of King Henry the eighth: which dignities with a faire patrimony Rowland Fitz-Eustace, seduced by the religious pretext unto rebellion, and flying his countrey lost by attaindour under Queene Eli∣zabeth. The families here remaining, besides the Giraldines, that be of higher birth above others, fetch their descent also out of England, namely, the Ougans, De-la- Hides, Ailmers, Washes, Boisels, Whites, Suttons, &c. As for the Giants dance, which they talke of that Merlin by art magick translated out of this territorie unto Salis∣bury plaine, as also of that most bloody battell which shall be one day betweene the English and the Irish at Molleaghmast, I willingly leave unto the credulous lovers of fabulous antiquity, and the vaine beleevers of prophesies. For my purpose is not to give fond tales the telling. These bee the midland counties of Leinster: now are we to goe unto those by the sea side. THE COUNTY OF WEISFORD. B Eneath that mouth, at which Barrow, Neore, and Shoure, the sister-like rivers, having embraced one another and joyned hands, are laid up in the Ocean, there sheweth it selfe Eastward in a Promontorie where the shore fetcheth a compasse round, the County of Weisford or Wexford. In Irish, County Reogh, where Ptolomee in times past pla∣ced the MENAPII. That these Menapians came hither from the Menapii, a nation in low Germany that dwelt by the sea coasts, the name doth after a sort imply. But whether that Carausius were of this or that nation, Carausius. who taking upon him the imperiall purple robe seized upon Britaine against the Emperour Dioclesian, I leave to others. For Aurelius Victor calleth him a Citizen of Menapia ; and the Citie Menapia is place by the Geographers not in those Low-countries of Germany, but in Ireland. In this county, upon the river Barrow, there flourished sometimes Rosse, a great Citie, well traded by merchants and peopled with inhabitants, fensed with a wall of great compasse by Isabell daughter to the Earle Richard Strongbow: and that is the only monument which now it sheweth. For by reason of discord and home broiles betweene the Citizens and the religious orders, it is a good while since brought in manner to nothing. More East, Duncannon, a castle with a garrison, standeth over the river, so as that it is able to command the river, that no ships should passe either to Waterford, or to Rosse: and therefore it was thought good policie, to fortifie this place when the Spaniards hovered and gaped for Ireland, in the yeere 1588. From thence at the very mouth of the river, there runneth out a narrow necke of land, which presenteth unto the sailers an high Turret, erected by the Citizens of Rosse when they were in flourishing estate, that they might more safely enter into the rivers mouth. A little from hence standeth Tintern, Tintern Mo∣nastery. upon the shore with many winding creekes, where William Mareschal Earle of Penbroch founded a notable Abbay, and called it de Voto, for that he had vowed to God to erect an Abbay, when hee was tossed in a sore and dangerous tempest: and being after shipwracke cast up a land in this place, performed it here according to his vow. This very Promontory Ptolomee calleth HIERON, Hieron a Pro∣montory. that is, Holy: and in the same signification, I would make no doubt but the inhabitants also called it. For the utmost towne thereof, at which the Englishmen landed, and set first foot in this Iland, they named in their native language Banna, which soundeth all one with Holy. From this Holy point, the shore turning full upon the East, runneth forth along Northward; over against which there lye flats and shallowes in the sea, that indan∣ger many a ship, which the Mariners call The Grounds. In this place Ptolomee setteth the river MODONA, and at the mouth thereof the city MENAPIA, which are so stript out of their names, that I am out of all hope in so great darknesse to discover any twy-light of the truth. But seeing there is one onely river that voideth it selfe in this place, which cutteth this county as it were just in the mids, and is now called Slane: seeing also at the very mouth thereof, where it maketh a Poole, there is a towne by a German name called Weisford, the head place of the whole county, I may the more boldly conjecture that Slane was that MODONA, and Weisford MENAPIA; and so much the rather, because this name is of a later date, to wit, a meere German, and given unto it by those Germans, whom the Irish tearme Oustmans. This towne is for the bignesse inferiour to many, but as memorable as any; because it was the first in all Ireland that when Fitz-Stephen, a most valiant Captaine, assaulted it, yeelded it selfe unto the protection of the English, and became a Colonie of the English: Whence this whole territorie is passing well peopled with English, who to this very day use the ancient Englishmens apparell and their language; yet so, as that they have a certaine kinde of mungrell speech between English and Irish. Dermot, who first drew the Englishmen over into Ireland, granted this and the territorie lying to it unto Fitz-Stephen for ever, who beganne a Burgh hard by at Carricke: and albe∣it the place were strong by naturall situation, yet hee helped it by art. But when as the said Fitz-Stephen had surrendred up his right into the hands of King Henry the second, he made it over to Richard Earle of Penbroch, that he should hold it in Fee from him and the Kings of England as superiour Lords. From whom by the Earles Mareschals, the Valences of the Lusignian line in France, and the Hastings, it descen∣ded to the Greies Lords of Ruthin, who commonly in ancient Charters are named Lords of Weisford ; although in the reigne of King Henry the sixth, Iohn Talbot is once called in the Records Earle of Shrewsbury and of Weisford. Touching this ri∣ver, take with you this verse, such an one as it is, of Nechams making. Ditat Eniscortum flumen quod Slana vocatur, Hunc cernit Weisford se sociare sibi. The river which is called Slane enricheth Eniscort, And this said river Weisford sees gladly with him to sort. For Eniscourt, a Burrough or incorporate Towne, is seated upon it. More inward by the same rivers side, ye have Fernes, known onely for the dignity of an Episcopall See in it; which in old time the Giraldines fortified with a Castle. Hard by, but be∣yond the river Slane dwell the Cavenaghs, Donels, Montaghs, & O-Mores, Irishmen of a stirring and tumultuous spirit: and among them the Sinottes, Roches, and Pep∣pards, Englishmen. On this side Slane the men of greatest name bee the Vicounts Mont-Garret: of whom the first was Richard Butler, a younger son of Pierce Earle of Ormond, adorned with that title by Edward the sixth, and many more of the same sirname; the Devereuxes, Staffords, Chevers, Whites, Forlongs, Fitz-Harris, Browns, Hores, Haies, Cods, Maylers, all of the English race and blood, like as be most of the common people. CAUCI. Cauci. T He CAUCI, who were likewise a people inhabiting the sea coast of Germany, seated themselves next unto the Menapii, but not so farre distant a sunder as those in Germany. Their country lying upon the sea was that which the O Tools and O Birns, families of Irishry dwel in, O Tooles. O Birns. men fed and maintained by wickednesse and bloodshed, impati∣ent of rest and quietnesse; and who presuming upon the strength of their holds and fastnesses, carry an obstinate minde against all lawes, and implacable hatred to Eng∣lish. For the repressing of whose audacious outrage, and to strengthen the authority of lawes, there hath been serious consultation had by most prudent and politicke per∣sons in the yeere 1578. that these small territories should be reduced into the forme of a county: and set out they were into sixe Baronies within certain appointed limits, which should make the county of Wicklo or Arcklo. Arklo. For a place this is of greatest name, and the Earle of Ormonds castle, who write themselves among other honoura∣ble titles in their stile, Lords of Arcklo: under which castle that river which Ptolomee calleth OVOCA falleth into the sea, making a creeke, and as Giraldus Cambrensis wri∣teth, The nature of this river is such, that as well when the sea floweth, as when it ebbeth, in this creeke it retaineth still the taste of the naturall freshnesse, saving his owne water entire and voide of all brackishnesse, even as far as to the maine sea. COMITATUS DUBLINIENSIS, The Countie of Divelin. B Eyond the CAUCI inhabited the EELANI, where now lieth the county of DUBLIN or DIVELIN;which on the East side is whol∣ly washed with the Irish sea, on the West bounded with the coun∣ty of Kildare, on the South joyning to the little territories of the O∣Tooles and O-Birns, Glynnes. and those which they tearme the Glynnes, and limi∣ted Northward with the county of Meth and Nanny a little river: the soile there∣of bringeth forth corne abundantly, and yeeldeth grasse and fodder right plente∣ously, besides it is well stored with all sorts of living creatures that are gotten by hunting and hawking for the table: but so destitute, for the greatest part, of woods, that in most places they use a clammy kind of fat turfe, or Sea-coale out of England for their fewell. In the South part thereof, which is lesse inhabited and more unci∣vill, and riseth up here and there with an hilly ridge, full enough of woods, and under which lye hollow vallies shaded with trees, which they call Glynnes ; every place is sore annoied with the two pernicious and mischievous septs or kinreds of the O-Tooles and the O-Birnes. Among these Glynnes appeareth the Bishopricke of Glandilaw, but utterly desolate, ever since it was annexed to the Archbishopricke of Divelin. All this county besides is passing well replenished with inhabitants and townes, and for wealthy port, and a certain peculiar finenesse and neatnesse that they use, surpasseth all other parts of Ireland, and is divided into five distinct Baronies, namely, Rath down, New castle, Castle-Knoc, Cowloc, and Bal-rodry, which not with∣standing I am not able to goe through as I would, for that their bounds are unknown to mee. First therefore I will runne along the sea coast only, and from thence, as the cour∣ses of the rivers lead me, survey the more in-land places; for there is no part of this county twenty miles from the shore. Wicklo lately made a county, 1606. To beginne then at the South side, the first place that sheweth it selfe upon this coast is Wicklo: where there standeth over the narrow haven a rocke, enclosed within a strong wall in stead of a castle, over which, as divers other castles besides of this kingdome, there can none by authority of Par∣liament bee set as Constable, but an Englishman borne, because to the hurt of the State, the Irishmen that were Constables had both defended the same badly, and also by a certaine connivencie suffered the prisoners to make escapes. As touch∣ing this haven hearken what Giraldus saith, who tearmeth it Winchiligillo. There is an haven at Winchiligillo, on that side of Ireland where it lieth neerer unto Wales, that ordinarily and usually at every ebbe of the sea receiveth waters flowing into it; and a∣gain at every return of tide, dischargeth and voideth the said water which it entertained: and when as the sea in the ebbe hath now by the going away of the tide forsaken the creeke, yet the river that runneth in by every chinke and winding cranke, becommeth bitter and salt with continuall brackishnesse. Then from the toppe of an hill New-castle looketh into the sea, and seeth the shelves of sand, which they call The Grounds, lying opposite a great way in length: The Grounds. Howbeit betweene them and the shore it is reported to bee seven fathom deepe of water. A little higher, where the riveret Bray commeth into the sea, appeareth Old-Court, the possessions of the Walshes of Caryckmain, who as they are of ancient stocke and gentry, Old-Court. so their family hath shot forth many branches in this tract. Next unto it is Powers or Poers-Court, Poers Court. belonging in times past, as appeareth by the name, unto the Poers ; a large and great castle, untill that Tirlough O Toole, after hee had revolted and rebelled, undermined and overthrew it. From Bray mouth the shore for to let in a creeke bendeth and windeth it selfe inward, and at the very bent of the elbow lieth a little Island called Saint Benets, belonging to the Archbishop of Divelin. This creeke or Bay is called Dublin Haven, into which Liffy the noblest river of this county out-powreth his streame: Liffy river, which Girald calleth Aven-Liff. who albeit his spring head where hee riseth bee but fifteene miles from his mouth, yet with so many winding crankes he fetch∣eth such a compasse, that first hee turneth into the South by Saint Patrickes land; then Westward, afterwards North, watering the county of Kildare, and at length in∣to the East by Castle-Knoc, the Barony in times past of the Tirils, whose inheritance by the females was devolved upon other about the yeere 1370. and so by Kilmai∣nam, an house in old time of Saint Iohns Knights of Jerusalem, now converted to a retiring place of the Lords Deputies. This Liffy doubtlesse is mentioned by Ptolomee, but through carelesnesse of the transcribers banished out of his owne due place. For the river LIBNIUS is set downe in the copies of Ptolomee at the very same latitude or elevation of the Pole, in the other part of the Iland, where there is no such river at all: but let him, if it please you, by a writ of recovery returne out of exile now to his owne city EBLANA, from whence uniustly he hath been for a time alienated: and take withall, if you think good, these verses of Necham as touching this river. Visere Castle-Knoc non dedignatur That is, the river L ff. Istum Dublini suscipit unda maris. To see and visit Castle-Knock Liffy doth not disdaine, At Dublin ready is the sea this streame to entertaine. For seated it is seven miles from his mouth, Eblana. Dublin. which alone fame may celebrate for all the cities of Ireland. This is that very city which Ptolomee called EBLANA, we DIVELIN, the Latine writers Dublinium and Dublinia, the Welsh Britans Dinas Dulin, the English Saxons in times past Duplin, and the Irish Bala-cleigh, that is, The towne upon Hurdles: for men say when it was built the foundation was laid upon Hurdles, the place was so fennish and moorish: like as Hispalis or Sivill in Spaine, which Isidore reporteth to have been so named, because it stood in a marish ground, upon piles and stakes deepely pitched into the earth. For the antiquity of Dublin I finde no certainty; but that very ancient it is the authority of Ptolomee perswa∣deth me to thinke. Saxo Grammaticus writeth, how it was pitifully rent and dismem∣bred in the Danish warres: afterwards it came under the subjection of Edgar King of England, which his Charter before mentioned confirmeth, wherein hee calleth it the most Noble City of Ireland. Then the Norwegians possessed themselves of it: Whence in the life of Gryffith Ap Cynan Prince of Wales, we read that Harald of Norway when he had subdued the greatest part of Ireland, built Develin. This may seeme to be that Harald Harfager, that is, with the faire lockes or tresses, who was the first King of Norway, whole line in descent goeth thus in the life of Gryffith: Ha∣rald begat a sonne named Auloed: Who also is named Abloi∣cus. Aulafus and Olavus. Auloed begat another Auloed; he had a sonne na∣med Sitric King of Develin: Sitric he begat Auloed, whose daughter Racwella was mo∣ther to Gryffith Ap Cynan borne at Dublin, whiles Tirlough reigned in Ireland. But this is extravagant. Develin at length when the English first arrived in Ireland, yeel∣ded unto their valour, and by them was manfully defended, when Ausculph Prince of the Dublinians, and afterwards Gottred King of the Isles fiercely on every side as∣saulted it: within a while after a Colony of Bristow-men was deduced hither, unto whom King Henry the second granted this City (happely at that time dispeopled) for to inhabite, with all the Franchises and free Customes, which the men of Bristow have, and that by those very words which I have alledged. Since which time it hath flou∣rished every day more and more, and in many tumultuous times and hard streights given notable proofe of most faithfull loyaltie to the Crowne of England. This is the roiall City and seat of Ireland, a famous towne for Merchandize, the chiefe Court of Justice, in munition strong, in buildings gorgeous, in Citizens po∣pulous. Ioscelin of Furnes in the life of S. Pa∣tricke. Lib. 2. verum Anglicar. c. 26. An old writer calleth it, a City in regard of the people noble, of the site most pleasant, by reason of the sea and river meeting together, rich and plentifull in fish, for trafficke famous, for the green plain delightfull and lovely, beset with woods of mast-bea∣ring trees, environed about with Parkes harbouring Deere. And William of New∣borrow of it writeth thus: Divelin a maritime citie is the mother citie of all Ireland, ha∣ving to it a haven passing well frequented, for trafficke and entercourse of Merchants matchable with our London. Seated it is in a right delectable and wholsome place: for to the South yee have hils mounting up aloft, Westward an open champion ground, and on the East the sea at hand and in sight; the river Liffy running downe at North-East affordeth a safe rode and harbour for ships. By the river side are certain wharfes or Kaies, Kaies. as we terme them, whereby the violent force of the water might be restrai∣ned. For this verbe ( Caiare ) in old writers signified to Keep in, to restrain and represse: which that most learned Upon Auso∣nius l. 2. c. 22. Scaliger hath well noted. A very strong wall of rough buil∣ding stone reacheth hence along by the sides of it (and the same toward the South for∣tified also with rampires) which openeth at six gates, from whence there runne forth suburbs of a great length. Dammensis. Toward the East is Dammes gate, and hard by standeth the Kings castle on high, most strongly fensed with ditches, towers, and an Armory or Store-house built by Henry Loundres the Archbishop, about the yeere 1220. In the East suburbs neere unto Saint Andrew the Apostles Church, Henry the second King of England, as Ho∣veden reporteth, caused a roiall palace (or rather a banqueting house) to be erected for himselfe, framed with wonderfull workmanship most artificially of smoothed watles after the manner of this country, wherein himselfe with the Kings and Princes of Ireland kept a solemne feast upon Christmas day. From hence is to bee seene just over against it a beautifull Colledge (in which place there stood in old time the Monasterie of All-Hallowes ) consecrated unto the name of the holy and indivisible Trinity, All-Hallowes. An University begun 1591. 13. May was the foundation laid, 1593. Scholars were first admitted. which for the exercise and polishing of good wits with good literature, Queene Elizabeth of most happy memory endow∣ed with the priviledges of an University; and being furnished of late with a notable Library, giveth no small hope that both religion, and all the exquisite and liberall sci∣ences will return eftsoones after their long exile to Ireland, as to their ancient home (unto which, as unto a Mart of Arts and good learning, strangers sometime used to flocke and repaire.) And verily in the reigne of Edward the Second Alexander Bicknor Archbishop of Divelin began to recall the profession of learning hither, 1320. A Manuscript of Baron Hoult. ha∣ving obtained from the Pope the priviledges of an University, and erected also pub∣like Lectures: but the troublesome times that presently ensued, interrupted the lau∣dable enterprise of that good man. The North gate openeth at the bridge built with arched work of new hewen stone by King John, and this joineth Oustmantowne to the City. For here the Oustmans, who came over, as Giraldus writeth, out of Norway and the parts of the Northren Islands, planted themselves, as the Annales beare re∣cord, about the yeere of salvation 1050. In this suburbe stood in times past the goodly Church of Saint Maries of Oust∣manby (for so in a Charter of King John it is called) an house also founded for preach∣ing Friers, called of them Black Friers, unto which of late daies have beene transla∣ted the Judiciall Courts of the kingdome. In the South quarter of the City stand two gates, Ormonds gate and Newgate (which is their common house of correction.) These lead unto the longest suburbe of all, called Saint Thomas street, and a mag∣nificent Abbey of the same name, called Thomas Court▪ Thomas Court. founded and endowed in times past with very ample revenues by King Henry the second for the expiation of the murder of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. Into the South openeth Pauls gate, and that which taketh the name of Saint Nicolas, making way into Saint Patrickes suburbe, wherein standeth the Archbishops Palace, knowne by the name of Saint Sepulchres, and a most stately Church dedicated unto Saint Patricke, right goodly to bee seene, with faire embowed workes, stone pavements, an arched roofe over head of stone worke, and a very high tower steeple. What time this Church was first built, it is, to say truth, uncertaine. That Gregorie King of the Scots came unto it about the yeere 890. the Scottish Historie doth record. The same afterward being much enlarged by John King of England, was ordained first to be a Church of Prebends by Iohn Comyn Archbishop of Dublin in the yeere 1191. and Pope Celestine the third confirmed the same. Then after him, Henry Loundres his successour in the Archbishopricke augmented it with dignities of Personages (for I may be bold to use here the founders words) and framed it conformable to the immu∣nities, orders, and approved customes of the Church of Salisbury. But in our daies it main∣taineth a Deane, a Chanter, a Chancellor, a Treasurer, two Arch-Deacons, and two and twenty Prebendaries; Statut. Parli. 18. H. 8. c. 15. The only light and lamp (that I may not conceale the most ample testimony which the Parliament of the kingdome giveth unto it) of all godly and Ecclesiasticall discipline and order in Ireland. There is another Cathedrall Church also standing in the very heart of the City, which being consecrate unto the Holy Trinity, is commonly called Christs Church ; touching the building thereof thus we read in the ancient records of the same Church: Sitric King of Dublin, the sonne of Ableb Earle of Dublin, gave unto the blessed Tri∣nity, and to Donatus the first Bishop of Dublin, a place to found a Church in unto the ho∣ly Trinity; and not onely so, but gold and silver also hee bestowed sufficiently for the buil∣ding of the Church and the whole close. This was done in the yeere 1012. in which, as Lancarvanensis avoucheth, Sitric the sonne of Abloie (for so he calleth him) lived and flourished in great name. The worke begun by Donatus, Laurence Archbishop of Dublin, Richard Strongbow Earle of Penbroch, commonly called Earle of Strigu∣lia (whose tomb is here to be seen, repaired by Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy) Ro∣bert Fitz-Stephen, and Reimund Fitz-Girald finished. Hard at the South side of this Church there standeth a stately Towne-hall, built of foure square stone, and called the Tolestale, Tole-stale. where causes are tried before the Maior of the City, and where the Citizens use to hold their Sessions and publike assemblies, for it enjoyeth many immunities. In times past this Citie had for the chiefe Magistrate a Provost ; but in the yeere of our redemption 1409. King Henry the fourth granted them li∣cence to chuse every yeere a Maior and two Bailifs: also that the Maior should have a gilt sword carried before him for ever. But afterwards, King Edward the sixth changed the Bailiffes into Sheriffes. Neither wanteth any thing here which a man can wish for in a most flourishing City, save only that an heape of sand, which the eb∣bing and flowing of the sea casteth up into the mouth of Liffy, doth so dam up and bar the haven, that it is not able to bring up any great vessels but at high water. Thus much of Dublin, for the most part of which I acknowledge my selfe beholden unto the diligence and learning of Iames Usher Chancellor of S. Patricks Church, whose variety of knowledge and judgement are far above his yeeres. As touching Robert Vere Earle of Oxford, whom King Richard the second, a Prince too too lavish in giving honourable titles, Marquesse of Dublin. made Marquesse of Dublin, and afterwards Duke of Ireland, I have spoken already, and reason I have none to re∣peat the same here. Yet will I note thus much, which I have since happened upon in the Records. When as King Richard aforesaid had advanced that Robert Vere Earle of Oxford to bee Marquesse of Dublin, and had given to him the Seigniory of Ireland during his life: Pr. p. Pat. anno 9. Rich. 2. m. 1. hee, desirous to augment his honour by more ennoblishing him with honourable Armes, granted also that as long as hee should live, and hold the said Seigniory, he should beare these Armes, Azure 3. Crownes Or in a Bordur, in his Standards, Pennons, Coat-armours, and other things wherein Armes are to be shewed in all Marshall matters, and elsewhere at his pleasure. But this grant was soone after recalled, and those Armes abolished. Where the river Liffy lodgeth himselfe in the Ocean, Houth standeth, compassed in manner round about with the sea: of which the Noblemen sirnamed Saint Lau∣rence, and dwelling there, Saint Laurence Barons of Houth. become named Barons of Houth ; men of rare felicity, for that in so long a descent of their line (for they are able to derive their pedegree from the time of King Henry the second) there hath of them, by report, none beene at∣tainted of high treason, none left ward in his minority. And within a little of this place is Malchide, Malchid. or Molachid, ennobled by the Lords thereof the Talbots, English by their first originall. More within the country, Northward there adjoineth hard to the county of Dub∣lin, Fingall, Fingall. that is, if you interpret it out of the Irish language, a nation of forreiners, (for they use to nominate the English Gall, as one would say, strangers, and Saissones, as it were, Saxons ) a little country, but very good and passing well husbanded; even the garner and barn of this kingdome, so great store of corne it yeeldeth every yeere. And here the soile striveth after a sort with the painfull labour of the husbandman, which in other places throughout this Iland lying neglected, without tillage and manuring, seemeth to make a very grievous complaint of the inhabitants sloth and lazinesse. There are planted every where throughout this county right worshipfull families, nobly descended of English blood; and namely, besides those which I have already mentioned, the Plonkets, Barnwels, Russels, Talbots, Dillons, Nettervils, Holy∣woods, Lutterels, Burnels, Fitz▪ Williams, Gouldings, Usshers, Cadleys, Finglases, Sar∣felds, Blackneys, Cruceys, Baths, &c. Thus farre forth summarily of Leinster, which in old time reached no farther. Now I wot not whether it bee worth the laughing at or the relating, that Thomas Stukely, Th. Stukely. when hee had in England and Ireland both made shipwracke of his good name, credit, and fortunes, having wound himselfe out of the danger of the lawes, curried such favour with Pope Gregory the thirteenth, what with making many faire promises, and what with bragging of great matters, that hee received at his hands these titles, Marquesse of Leinster. Marquesse of Leinster, Earle of Weisford and Caterlogh, Vicount Murrough, and Baron of Rosse and Ydron. With which titles hee being puffed up in pride, whiles he thought to conquer Ireland, went aside into Africk, and there with the three Kings that were slaine in one battell, made up the enterlude of his life with an honest close and catastrophe. MIDIA, OR MEDIAMETH. T He rest of the Countrey of the Eblani was in ancient time a king∣dome, and the fifth part of Ireland, which in their owne native lan∣guage they call Miih, the English Meth, Giraldus nameth it in Latin Midia and Media, perhaps, because it is in the very middle of the I∣land. For they say that Killair a castle in these parts, which seem∣eth to be in Ptolomee LABERUS, Laberus. is as it were the Navill of Ireland. And the very name implieth no lesse: For Lair in the Irish tongue signifieth The Middle. This Meth lieth stretched out from the Irish sea as farre as to the river Sha∣non: For the soile thereof, as saith Bartholomaeus Anglicus, Fertile it is in corne, pasture ground, and cattell, plentifull in fish, flesh, and other victualls of white meat, as butter cheese, and milke, watered also with rivers. The situation is delectable to the eye, and an wholsome aire. In regard of woods and marishes in the skirts and borders, it hath a very hard accesse and entry unto it: And therefore, considering the multitude of people, the strength of castles and townes, is i commonly called for the peace thereof, the CHAM∣BER of IRELAND. Within the memorie of our fathers, because the country was too large for to be governed by one Sheriffe, and to the end that justice might with more facility be ministred, it was divided by authority of Parliament in the 38. yeere of King Henry the eighth into two parts, namely, the county of East Meth, and the county of West-Meth. THE COUNTY OF EAST-METH. T He County of EAST-METH is environed round about with the county of Kildar South, with the county of Dublin and the sea East, with the territorie of Louth North, and with the county of West Meth on the West. The whole is divided into 18. Baronies: Dueleke, Scrine, Slane, Margallen, Navan, Kenles, halfe the Barony of Fower neer to Kenles, Killalou, Demore, Cloue, Moylagh, Loghern, Oldcastle, Luyn, Moyfeuraragh, Deese, Rath-touth, and Dunboyn. Boyn, which Ptolomee calleth BUVINDA, Giraldus BOANDUS, a noble river sprin∣ging out of the North side of the Kings county, runneth through this county. In the hither part on this side Boyn, these are the places memorable: Galtrim, where the Huseys have dwelt a long time: Killin Castle, which Hugh Lacy Custos of Ireland un∣der King Henry the second built; and Dunsany, which have their Parliament Barons, Noblemen of ancient descent out of the family of the Plonkets, which others fetch out of Denmark: but they beare the very same Armes in sundry colours, which Alan Plonket of Kilpecke in England did: who also under King Edward the first lived in the dignity and port of a Baron. Now this house of the Plonkets in Ire∣land came up and grew to bee of high estimation, ever since that Sir Christopher Plonket, a valiant and wise man (Deputy, as they terme him, unto Richard Duke of Yorke, Lord Lievtenant in King Henry the sixth his time) was advanced to the dig∣nity of Baron of Killin, which fell unto him by his wife, heire to the family of the Cu∣sakes: and his second son by his own worth & valour obtained the title of Baron Dun∣sany. On the farther side of Boyn, Barnwell. Baron Trimlet stoun. are Trimletstoun, which hath his Baron out of the fa∣mily of the Barnwells (for King Edward the fourth promoted Sir Robert Barnwell to the honour of a Parliamentary Baron;) Gormanston, which now hath had honourable Vicounts, men of good desert in the Common-wealth, descended from the line of the Prestons (as it is verily thought) in Lancashire; Baron Slane. and Slane, which is able likewise to shew Barons thereof, out of the family of the Flemings: and amongst them stands Aboy, a mercate towne well inhabited and of good resort, upon the river Boyn: which when it hath passed beside Glan-Iores, that is, The land of the sonnes of George (this George was of the Birminghams progeny, whose heire by marriage brought a faire inheritance with the castle of Carbray unto the Prestons ) runneth under Trim a pretty towne of trade, and one of the better ort, where William Pepard erected a castle. This was an ancient Baronie of the Lacies, which accrewed unto the titles of the Dukes of Yorke, who stiled themselves Lords of Trim. Then floweth it beside Navan, Navan. Baronet of Na∣van. which hath a Baron or Baronet, but not of the Parliament house, and affor∣deth for the most part a dwelling house unto the Bishop of the Dioecesse, who hath now no Cathedrall Church, but doth all with the assent of the Clergy of Meth. His See seemeth to have beene at Cluanarard, Bishop of Meth. which is called also Clunart, where Hugh Lacy in times past built a castle: For in the letters Apostolicall we read him thus, Episcopus Midensis, five Cluanarardensis, that is, The Bishop of Meth or Cluana∣rard, and corruptly, as it is to be thought, in a Roman Provinciall Elnamirand. Boyn now by this time carrying a fuller streame, after it hath with an hasty course swiftly passed on certain miles, neere unto Drodagh emptieth himselfe into the sea. Of this swift running what if I should thinke this Boyn tooke his name: for Boan both in Irish and British also signifieth swift, and our Poet Necham of this river hath thus versi∣fied. Ecce Boan qui Trim celer influit, istius undas Subdere se salsis Drogheda cernit aquis. Lo Boin that swiftly unto Trim doth run, and marke withall, How at Tredagh his streame into the salt sea gulfe doth fall. The men of greatest reputation and name in this county, besides those whom I re∣hersed before, to wit, the Plonkets, Flemings, Barnwels, and Husseys, are the Darceys, Cusakes, Dillons, Birminghams, De la hides, Nettervils, Garvies, Cadels, and others: whom if I doe not name at all, or if I reckon either these or others elsewhere not in their owne ranke, according to their worth and degree, I desire no imputation may be laid upon me therefore. THE COUNTY OF WEST-MEATH. T He county of WEST-METH, so called in respect of the other a∣bovesaid, unto which it adjoineth on the West side, reacheth un∣to the river Shanon, and lieth betweene the Kings County South, and Longford County North; unto which it is not willing to give place either in fertilitie of soile, multitude of inhabitants, or any thing else whatsoever, unlesse haply it bee inferiour in civility of manners. Molingar. Molingar by authority of Parliament was ordained to be the head and principall shire towne, because it lieth, as it were, in the very midst: and the whole country is laid forth into twelve Hundreds or Baronies, viz. Fertulogh, where the Tirels, Barons Delvin. Ferbille, where the Darcies dwell; Delvin which adorneth the old noble stock of the Nogents (who came first out of England) with the title of a Parlia∣ment Baron. These are descended from that Sir Gilbert Nogent, whom Hugh Lacy the Conquerer of Meth, for his courageous and valiant service in the wars of Ireland, rewarded both with these lands and those also of Furry, as that most learned Gentle∣man Richard Stanihurst hath recorded: Fourry aforesaid, as also Corkery, where the Nogents dwell; Nogents. Moyassell, where the Tuts and Nogents; Maghertiernan, where very many of the Petits and the Tuts; Moigoysy, where the Tuts and Nangles; Rathcomire, where the Daltons; Magirquirk, where the Dillons, all propagated from English blood do inhabite; Clonlolan, where the O-Malaghlins, of the old roiall line of Meth; Moycassell, where the Magohigans, meere Irish beare sway: and others whose very names carry an harsh found of more barbarousnesse: which notwithstanding, even as Martiall the Poet when hee had reckoned up certaine barbarous Spanish names of places, being himselfe a Spaniard, said, That he liked them better than British names, so the Irish love these rather than the English: in so much as one of their Potentates gave it out, that he would in no wise learne the English tongue, for feare he should in speaking English get a wry mouth. Thus the crow thinkes her owne birds fairest; and we all are given to like our owne too well, even with the disdaine and contempt of others. Lords of Meth. This Meth had in times past Kings, or pety Princes rather to rule it. And, as we read, that Monarch or sole King of Ireland, Slany, caused the revenues of Meth to bee as∣signed and appropriat to the furnishing of his royall table. But when the Englishmen had once set fast footing in Ireland, Hugh Lacy subdued a great part thereof, and King Henry the second enfeoffed him in it, and made him Lord of Meth, who while he was building of a castle at Derwarth ▪ and holding his head downe to prescribe a Carpen∣ter somewhat that he would have done, had by him his head stricken off with his axe. This Hugh begat two sonnes, Hugh Earle of Ulster, of whom I will speake hereafter: and Walter Lord of Trim, who begat Gilbert that died before his father. By the daughters of this Gilbert, Genevile. Margaret and Maud, the one part by the Genevils, who were (as they write) of the house of Lorrain ; and by the Mortimers, came to the Dukes of York, and so to the Kings domain or Crowne: for Peter de Genevile, sonne to that Maud, begat Ioan espoused to Roger Mortimer Earle of March: and the other part by Margaret wife to John Lord Verdon, Constables of Ireland. and by his heires who were Constables of Ireland, was devolved at length upon divers families in England, as Furnivall, Burghersh, Crophul, &c. THE COUNTY OF LONGFORD. U Nto West Meath on the North side joyneth the County of LONG∣FORD (reduced into this ranke of Countries a few yeeres since by the provident policy of Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy) called before time Anale, Anale. inhabited by a numerous Sept of the O-Pharols: of which house there be two great men and Potentates; one ruleth in the South part, O-Pharoll. named O-Pharoll Boy, that is, The yellow: the other in the North, called O-Pha∣roll Ban, that is, The white. And very few Englishmen are there among them, and those planted there but of late. Along the side of this County passeth Shannon, the noblest river of all Ireland, which as I have said runneth between Meth and Conaught. River Senus or Sineus. Shannin and Shannon. Ptolomee nameth it SE∣NUS, Orosius SENA, and some copies SACANA, Giraldus Flumen Senense: but the people dwelling there by call it Shanon, that is, as some expound it, The ancient river. He springeth out of Thern hils in the county Le Trim, and forthwith cutting through the lands Southward, one while overfloweth the bankes, and enlargeth himselfe in∣to open Pooles: and other whiles drawes backe againe into narrow straights, and af∣ter he hath run abroad into one or two Lakes, gathering himselfe within his bankes, valeth bonnet to MACOLICUM, Macolicum. Malc. now called MALC (as the most learned Geogra∣pher Gerard Mercator hath observed) whereof Ptolomee hath made mention; and then by and by is entertained by another broad Mere (they call it Lough Regith ) the name and situation whereof doth after a sort imply, Rigia. that the City RIGIA, which Ptolomee placeth there, stood not farre from hence. But when hee hath once gotten beyond this Poole, and draweth himselfe to a narrower channell within the bankes, there standeth hard upon him the towne Athlon, of which I will write in place con∣venient. From thence Shannon having gotten over the Water-fall at Killolo (whereof I must speake anon) being now able to beare the biggest ships that are, in a divided channell, as it were with two armes claspeth about the city Limirick, whereof I have spoken already. From hence Shannon passing on directly for threescore miles or thereabout in length, bearing a great bredth, and making many an Iland by the way, speedeth himselfe Westward; and in what place soever he becommeth shallow and affordeth fords at an ebbe or low water, there were planted little forts with wards (such was the carefull providence of our forefathers) to restraine the inrodes of prey∣taking robbers. And so at length he runneth and voideth out at an huge mouth into the West Ocean beyond Knoc Patric, Which others call Mare Bre∣dunicum. that is, Patricks hill: for so Necham termeth that place in these his verses of Shannon. Fluminibus magnis laetatur Hibernia, Sineus Inter Connatiam, Momomiamque fluit. Transit per muros Limirici, Knoc Patric illum Oceani clausum sub ditione videt. Ireland takes joy in rivers great, and Shannon them among, Betwixt Connaught and Munster both holds on his course along, He runneth hard by Limrick wayes: Knoc Patric then at last Within the gulfe of th' Ocean doth see him lodged fast. CONNACHTIA, OR CONAGHT. T He fourth part of Ireland, which beareth Westward, closed in with the river Shannon, the out-let of the Lake or Lough Erne, which some call Trovis, others Bana, and with the maine Western sea, is named by Giraldus Cambrensis Conachtia and Conacia, in English Conaght, and in Irish Conaughty. In ancient times, as we may see in Ptolomee, it was in∣habited by the GANGANI, Nagnatae. Gangani. Concani. Auteri. who are also named CONCANI, AUTERI and NAG∣NATAE. Those CONCANI or GANGANI, like as the LUCENI their next neigh∣bours that came from the Lucensii in Spaine, may seeme by the affinity of name and also by the vicinity of place to have beene derived from the CONCANI in Spaine, who in Strabo are according to the diversity of reading named CONIACI and CONISCI: whom Silius testifieth in these verses following to have beene at the first Scythians, and to have usually drunke horses blood (a thing even of later daies nothing strange among the wild Irish.) Et qui Massagetem monstrans feritate parentem, Cornipedis fusa satiaris Concane vena. And Concane though in savagenesse that now resembling still Thy parents old the Massagets, of horse-blood drinkst thy ll. And beside him Horace, Et letum equino sanguine Concanum. And Concaine, who thinks it so good To make his drinke of horses blood. Unlesse a man would suppose this Irish name Conaughty to be compounded of CON∣CANI and NAGNATAE. Well, this Province as it is in some place fresh and fruit∣full, so by reason of certaine moist places, yet covered over with grasse, which of their softnesse they usually tearme Boghes, like as all the Iland besides every where is dangerous, and thicke set with many and those very shady woods. As for the sea coast, lying commodious as it doth with many baies, creekes, and navigable rivers, after a sort it inviteth and provoketh inhabitants to navigation: but the sweetnesse of inbred idlenesse doth so hang upon their lazie limbes, that they had rather get their living from doore to doore, than by their honest labours keepe themselves from beggery. Conaught is at this day divided into these counties, Twomond or Clare, Galway, Maio, Slego, Letrim, and Roscoman. The ancient CONCANI abovesaid, held in old time the more Southerly part of this Conaught, where now lye Twomond or Clare, the county Galway, Clan-Richards country, and the Barony of Atterith. TWOMOND, OR THE COUN∣TIE CLARE. T Womon or Twomond, which Giraldus calleth Thuetmonia, the Irish Two∣woun, that is, The North-Mounster (which although it lye beyond the ri∣ver Shannon yet was counted in times past part of Mounster, untill Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy laid it unto Conaught ) shooteth out into the sea with a very great Promontory growing by little and little thin and narrow. On the East and South sides it is so enclosed with the winding course of the river Shannon, which waxeth bigger and bigger, like as on the West part with the open maine sea, and on the North side confineth so close upon the county Galway, that there is no comming unto it by land, but through the Clan-Ricards territory. This is a country wherein a man would wish for nothing more, either from sea or soile, were but the industry of the inhabitants correspondent to the rest; which industry Sir Robert Muscegros an English Nobleman, Richard Clare and Thomas Clare, younger brethren of the stock of the Earles of Glocester (unto whom King Ed∣ward the first had granted this country) stirred up long since by building townes and castles, and by alluring them to the fellowship of a civill conversation; of whose name the chiefe towne Clare, now the dwelling place of the Earle of Twomond, tooke de∣nomination, as also the whole tract, of it called the county of Clare. The places of greater note and name than the rest, Killaloe. are Kilfennerag and Killaloe or Laon, the Bishops seat. This in the Roman Provinciall is tearmed Episcopatus Ladensis, where there stands a rocke in the mid channell of the river Shannon, Catarracta. from which the water rush∣eth downe a maine with a great fall and noise, and by standing thus in the way as a bar, hindreth the river that it can carry vessels no further; which if it were cut down, or a draine made about it, the river were able to bring up vessels much higher, to the great commodity of all the neighbour inhabitants. Not far from the banke of Shannon, Bunraty. is seated Bunraty, for which Sir Robert Musce∣gros obtained from King Henry the third the liber ie of a Mercate and Faire, and when he had fortified it with a castle, gave it at length unto King Edward the first, who granted both this towne and the whole territory unto Richard Clare aforesaid. And seven miles from thence, Clare. appeareth Clare the principall towne, at a Creeke (flowing up out of Shannon ) full of Islands: and these twaine are the onely mercate townes here, and those but small ones. Most of the English who were in times past brought hither to inhabite, are either rooted out, or become degenerate and growne Irish: but they who carry the whole sway here at this day, be of the Irish blood; as Mac-Nemors, Mac-Mahon, O-loughton, and the mightiest by far of all other, the O-Briens, descended from the ancient Potentates or Kings of Conaght, or as themselves give it forth, Earles of Two∣mond. from the Monarchs of Ireland. Of these, Morogh O-Brien was the first Earle of Twomond, created by King Henry the eighth for terme of life; and after him to Donough his brothers sonne, and his heires; who at the same time being made Baron of Ibarcan, succeeded in the Earldome, and was slain by his brother Sir Donel: O-Brien Connagher, O-Brien Donaghs son, was the third Earle, and father to Donaugh now the fourth Earle, who hath shewed singular good proofe of his faithfull loialty and courageous valour unto his Prince and countrey in most dangerous times, to his singular commendation. THE COUNTY OF GALLWAY. T He county of GALLWAY meereth South upon Clare, West upon the Ocean, North upon the county Maio, and East upon the river Shannon. A land very thankefull unto the industrious husbandman, and no lesse profitable unto the Shepheard. The West shore endented in with small in-lets and out-lets, or armes of the sea, hath a border all along of greene Ilands and rugged rockes, set orderly, as it were, in a row: among which, foure Ilands called Arran, Ilands of Ar∣ran. make a Barony, and many a foolish fable goes of them, as if they were the Ilands of the living, wherein none doe dye: also Inis Ceath, well knowne in times past by reason of the Monastery of Colman a devout Saint, Bed. l. 4. c. 4. Ecclesiast. hist. founded for Scots and Englishmen: and Inis-Bouind, which Bede interpreteth out of the Scottish tongue to signifie, The Isle of white Heifers ; whereas it is a meere British word. But the Englishmen soone forsooke the Monastery, when the Scots and they could not well agree together. Logh-Corbes. Further within lieth a Lake, called Logh-Corbes (where Ptolomee placeth the river AUSOBA) spreading out twenty miles or thereabout in length, and three or foure in bredth, being navigable, and garnished with 300. petty Ilands full of grasse, and bearing Pine-trees; which Lake when it reacheth neere the sea, grow∣ing narrow into a river, Gallwey. runneth under Gallway, in the Irish tongue Galliue ; named so (or else I cannot tell) of the Gallaeci in Spaine, the very principall city of this Pro∣vince, and which would thinke hardly to be reckoned the third in Ireland. Surely a very proper and faire City it is, built almost round, and in manner tower-like, of en∣try, and some stone, and hath beside to set it out a Bishops See: and withall, through the benefit of the haven and rode abovesaid under it, being well frequented with merchants, hath easie and gainfull trafficke, by exchange of rich commodities both by sea and land. The battell of Knoctoe. 1516. Not full foure miles from hence standeth Knoc-toe, that is, the hill of Axes ; under which that noble Girald Fitz-Girald, Earle of Kildare, and by times, for the space of three and thirty yeeres Lord Deputie of Ireland, discomfited and put to flight, after a bloody overthrow, the greatest rabble of rebels that ever was seen before in Ireland, raised and gathered together by William Burk, O-Bren, Mac-Nomare, and O-Carrall. Not farre from hence Eastward standeth Aterith (in which remaine some footings of the name of AUTERI) commonly called Athenry, Aterith. enclosed round about with a wall of great circuit, but slenderly inhabited. It glorieth much of that warlike Baron thereof, Birminghams. Iohn de Birmingham an Englishman; out of which family the Earle of Louth descended: but these Birminghams of Aterith, being now as it were degenerate into barbarous Irishry, scarce acknowledge themselves to have beene English originally. The septs or kinreds of the Irish here, that be of the better sort, are O Kelleis, O Mai∣den O Flairts, Mac Dervis, &c. Clan-Ricard. Earles of Clan-Ricard. Clan-Ricard, that is, The sonnes, kinred, or Tube of Richard, or the land of Richards sonnes, confineth upon these, and lieth to this county. The name it tooke, after the Irish manner, from one Richard of an English family, called de Burgh, that became af∣terwards of most high renowne and name in this tract, and out of which King Henry the eighth created Ulick Burgh Earle of Clan-Ricard, whose eldest sonne carrieth the title of Baron Dun-Kellin. His sonne Richard was the second Earle, whose children, begotten of sundry wives, stirred up many troubles, to the griefe of their father, the overthrow of their owne country, and themselves. After Richard, who died an old man, succeeded his sonne Ulick the third Earle, and father to Richard the fourth Earle now living, whose fast fidelity and singular fortitude hath, to his great praise, evident∣ly appeared, when the English, and their whole estates in Ireland, were in greatest danger. Archbishop∣rick of Toam, or Tuen. In this territory is the Archbishops See of Toam, unto which in old time ma∣ny Bishops were subject; but at this day the Bishopricks of Anagchony, Duae, and Maio are annexed unto it. The Bishoprick likewise of Kilmacough, which in the old Provinciall, unlesse the name be corrupt, is not mentioned, as also of Clonfert, are sea∣ted in this part, and, as I have heard, united to the See of Toam. THE COUNTY OF MAIO. T He county Maio, on which the Westerne Ocean beateth, lies bounded South with the county of Galway ; East with the county Roscoman, and North with the county of Slego. A fertile country and a pleasant, abun∣dantly rich in cattell, Deere, Hawkes, and plenty of hony: taking the name of Maio, Maio. a little city with a Bishops See in it, which in the Roman Provinciall is called Mageo. But that Episcopall seat is now annexed to the Metropolitane of Toam, and the neighbour inhabitants repaire for Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction to the Bi∣shop of Killaley, Killaley. Bishoprick of Killaley. in the Barony of Tir-Auley. In this Maio, if I deceive not my selfe, Colman a Bishop of Ireland built, as Bede writeth, a Monastery for thirty men or thereabout of the English Nation, trained in the profession of the Monasticall life, whom he brought out of England into Ire∣land. But heare what Bede saith. Lib 4. cop. 4. Colman found a place in the Isle of Ireland, meet for building of a Monastery, named in the old Scottish tongue Magio. And he bought a part of it, which was not much, of the Earle, unto whose possession it belonged, to found a Mo∣nastery therein: but with this condition annexed unto the sale, that the Monks restant there should pray unto the Lord for him also that permitted them to have the place. Now when hee had straightwaies erected this Monastery, with the helpe of the said Earle and all the neighbour inhabitants, hee placed the Englishmen there, leaving the Scots behinde in the Isle Bouind. Which very Monastery is inhabited at this day by Englishmen: for the same it is, which now of a small one grown to be great, is usually termed, In Mago. And having now this good while turned all to better orders, it conteineth a notable covent of Monkes, who being assembled there together out of the Province of England, according to the example of the reverend fathers, under Regularity and a Canonicall Abbat, live in great continency and sincerity with the labour of their owne hands. About the yeere of our Lord 1115. this monasterie was re-edified, and flourished in King Johns time, who by his Patent confirmed many farmes and faire lands unto it. Neither verily is there any other place, that I can finde memorable, unlesse it be Logh-Mesk a good large and fishfull Lake, Logh-Mesk. in two small Islands whereof stand sure forts, that belonged to the familie of Burke. This county is not so famous for the townes therein as the Inhabitants, who are either of the Irish race, as O-Mayles, Ioies and Mac-vadus ; or of the Scotish out of the Islands Hebrides, and out of the sept of Donell, Galloglasses. whereupon they bee called Clan-Donells, and Galloglasses, and as it were, doughty mercinary souldiors, who fight with two edged axes, and be armed with habergeons or coates of maile, procured in times past to come hither by the re∣bels, and endowed here with lands: or else of English blood, as the said Burkes, Ior∣dans, descended from one Iordan of Excester, Nangles of Castlough, Prendergest of Clan-Moris. But the most puissant be those Burkes, who after a sort are beholden both for their first beginning, and also for their glory unto William a younger bro∣ther of Walter de Burgo or Burk of Ulster. This William, highly renowned for his militarie prowesse, being led away prisoner into Scotland, and leaving his wife behind him for an hostage, when he was restored to his owne home, by his manhood recove∣red Conaught (out of which in his absence all the English had been expelled by Phelim O Conor ) having slaine in the field the said Phelim O Conor, Mac Dermond, Tego and Kelly, and was himselfe at last, in revenge, killed by Cormac Mac-Dermond. His grandson Thomas, by his son Edmund sirnamed Albanach (because he was borne in Scotland) when he saw the goodly and rich inheritance of his owne familie, transla∣ted by a female unto Leonell Duke of Clarence, tooke it to the heart, and therefore raising a power of lewd lawlesse and desperate persons (who will be never wanting in Ireland nor else where) by force and wrong seized the Patrimony of the Earles of Ulster in this County into his owne hands, and after the name of that Grandfather of his, whose glorious fame and gracious authority was then fresh in remembrance, cal∣led himselfe Mac-William, Mac-William who also is called Mac-William Eughter. Cuttings, Coyne, Live∣rey, &c. Cause of Re∣bellions in Ireland. Richard Bingham. that is, the sonne of William. And his posterity under that name and title usurped a tyrannie in these parts, raging upon themselves o∣ther whiles, with mutuall injuries, and oppressing the poore people a long time with extorting, pilling and spoyling: insomuch as they left scarce one village or house in the Country unrazed and unrifled. This powerfull violence of theirs Sir Richard Bingham principall Commissioner, or Governour of Conaght, a man resolute, severe and valiant, fit for such a fierce and fell Province, thought not to bee endured. For he well understood being prudent and politicke, that these injust op∣pressions, pollings and pillings were the principall causes of the rebellions, of barba∣rousnesse, and base beggery of Ireland, yea and that they drew the people away from their due obedience and allegeance to their Prince, so as that they would acknow∣ledge no other soveraigne than their owne Lords and Captaines: he therefore to establish (what hee might) the royall power and authority there, and to overthrow this tyrannicall government of this Mac-William and of others getting head, em∣ployed with all diligence his whole care and cogitations to the uttermost: and al∣beit he had from time to time many imputations, suggestions, and complaints eager∣ly urged upon him, both before Queene Elizabeth and also the Lord Deputy, yet proceeded hee in his purpose. Contrariwise, those of the family of Burke, their followers and dependants, that refused to obey the lawes, tooke armes and drew to band and side with them, the Septs of the Clan-Donells, Ioies and others, who distrusted themselves and their owne power; whom Bingham the Gover∣nour soone scattered: and having forced their forts, drave them into woods and lurking hooles, untill the Lord Deputy taking pittie of them, upon their hum∣ble supplication, commanded by his Missives that they should bee received upon termes of peace. But they who by warre had troubled the peace, and knowing not how to lay downe warre for sweetnesse of peace, were no sooner relieved and raised as it were from death, but they tooke armes againe, entred afresh into actuall rebelli∣on, drave booties every where, and made foule uprores in all places, crying out, That they would set up their Mac-William, or else send for one out of Spaine: That they would not admit a Sheriffe, nor yeeld obedience to lawes. And herewith they closely procured the Scottish Ilanders from out of the Hebrides, to come over for to aide them, promi∣sing them faire lands and possessions: whereupon the Lord Deputy commanded the Governour to represse and bridle this their excessive and malapert insolence. He then immediately, when they rejected all equall and indifferent conditions offered unto them, assembled an army, and pursued them so hotly through the woods and forests, that after six or seven weeks being grievously hunger-bitten, they most humbly sub∣mitted themselves. At which very time the auxiliary forces of the Scots aforesaid, came seeking through desert by-waies, and untravelled out waies, as closely as they could, to come into the county of Maio : but the Governour with continuall journies affronted them by night and day so neere, and followed upon them so hard, that in the end he intercepted them at Ardnary, & valiantly giving the charge, put them to flight, after he had killed and drowned in the river Moin about three thousand of them. A happy victory this was, and of great consequence both for the present & future times: whereby the rebellion, together with the title of Mac-William, was extinguished. Do∣nell Gormy, and Alexander Carrough, the sons of Iames Mac-Conel, and those Ilanders who most of all had plagued Ireland were slaine. These occurrents have I briefly set down out of my Annales (impertinent though they be to my intended purpose) which for their worthinesse ought more at large to be penned by some Historiographer. THE COUNTY OF SLEGO. S Omewhat higher lieth the county of Slego, a plenteous and battle coun∣try for feeding and raising of cattell, wholly also coasting upon the sea. Betweene it and Ulster Northward runneth the river TROBIS, which Ptolomee calleth RAVIUS, as an out-let of the Lake Erne: it is severed from the neighbour counties, Le Trim and Roscoman, by the comberous Curlew hills ; and the river Suc divideth it in twaine. In some place hereabout Ptolo∣mee setteth the city NAGNATA; Nagnata. but what city it was it passeth my wit to find out. He hath placed also the river LIBNIUS in this tract, which through the retchles∣nesse of the transcribers, I reduced even now from out of exile to Dublin his owne ci∣ty. But that place which Ptolomee here pointeth out, is now called THE BAY OF SLEGO, a rode full of harbours under Slego the principall place of this county: where standeth a castle, the seat at this day of the Sept of O-Conor, who of it take their ad∣dition of Slego, and fetch their pedegree, as they say themselves, from that Rotherick O-Conor Dun, who being a great man and of much puissance, bare himselfe as Mo∣narch of Ireland, what time as the English entred first into Ireland, & hardly yeelded himselfe unto King Henry the second, although in words he professed submission, and oftentimes raising tumults (as an author without name of that age writeth) used ever and anon to cry out and say, That these words following of Adrian the Pope, in his Patent or Charter made unto the King of England, were prejudiciall unto him: Enter you into that Iland, Diploma l. 2. c. 6 Girald. Cambren. de▪ expugnatio. Hibern p. 787. and execute whatsoever shall concerne the glory of God, and the salvation of that land: and let the people of the said land receive you and honour you as their Lord: untill such time as Pope Alexander the third by a new Bull or Charter of his, had confirmed in like manner unto the Kings of England their right to Ireland: for then became he more tractable, and condescended unto more equall conditions, as I shall shew anon. After these O Conors, the greatest men of name in this territory are O Don, O Haris, O Ghar, and Mac-Donagh. THE COUNTY OF LE-TRIM. T He County of Slego Eastward is enclosed with Breany, the possession of the ancient family of O-Rorck, which drew their descent from Ro∣therick Monarch of Ireland, whom they by contraction (which they take pleasure in) terme Rorck, untill that Brien O Rorck, Lord of Brea∣ny and Minterolise, fed with vaine hopes by Pope Sixtus Quintus and the King of Spaine, had persidiously cast off his allegeance to Queene Elizabeth, and taken armes: who being streightwaies chased into Scotland, and sent backe into England, suffered for his inconsiderate rashnesse due punishment upon the gallowes, and his lands were adjudged to the Crown. This Breany, by Iohn Perot Lord Depu∣tie was made a county, and of the chiefe towne called Le-Trim, which riseth up throughout with hills, full of ranke grasse; yet not so, as that it should be altogether true which Solinus reporteth of Ireland: namely, that it is so full of forage, that unlesse cattell were kept other whiles from grasing, their fulnesse would endanger them. And so much cattell it feedeth, that within the little circuit which it hath, it may rec∣kon at one time above a hundred and twenty thousand head of beasts. In this stan∣deth Achonry Bishopricke, united now to the See of Elphin. And Shannon, the So∣veraigne of all rivers in Ireland, hath here his spring-head; which being one while narrower, and another while broader, with divers turning and winding reaches that he makes, washeth and watereth of either side, as I have said, many a country. The principall families be O Rorck, O Murreies, Mac Lochleims, Mac Glanchies, and Mac Granelles, all meere and stark Irish. Whereas Iohn Burgh, sonne to Richard the Earle of Clan-Ricards, was created by Queene Elizabeth Baron Le-Trim, who was after∣ward slaine by his envious concurrents, I cannot say whether he had that title of this Le-Trim, or of some other place in this kingdome. THE COUNTY OF ROSCOMAN. U Nder the county of Letrim Southward lieth ROSCOMAN, ordained to be a county by Henry Sidney Lord Deputy; lying out a good length, but narrow; closed up between the two rivers Suc Westward, and Sha∣non Eastward, and on the North side bounded with Curlew mountaines. A territory it is for the most part plaine, fruitfull, feeding many herds of cattell, and with meane husbandry and tillage yeeldeth plenty of corne. Where it beareth Northward, Curlew hills. the steepe mountaines of Curlew perke up aloft, and those impassable untill by the carefull industry of George Bingham there was a way cut out: which Curlews not long since became more notorious, for the disastrous death of Sir Coni∣ers Clifford, and (by his default) for the slaughter with him of most valiant and expe∣rienced souldiers. In this county are reckoned foure Baronies. Under Curlew hills, by the river Shanon, Barony of Boyle. the Baronie of Boyle first commeth in view: where was founded in times past a famous Abbey, in the yeere 1152. together with the Abbey of Beati∣tude, and Mac Dermot ruleth all there as Lord; then by the river Suc lieth the Baro∣nie Balin Tober, Balin Tober. where O Conor Dun is of the greatest command: and upon it joineth Elphen an Episcopall See. Somewhat lower is Roscoman, the Baronie of O Conor Roo, that is, Conor the red, wherein is seated the chiefe towne of the whole countie, sensed in times past with a castle by Robert Ufford Lord Justice of Ireland; but all the houses are mean and thatched; and more Southward, Athlone the Baronie of the O Kellies, so named of the head towne, which hath a castle and ward in it; also a most beautifull bridge of hewen stone, which to the great terrour of seditious rebels, Queen Elizabeth in our memory appointing Henry Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland overseer thereof, caused to be built, with a purpose to constitute in that place (as most fit of all others in Ireland to represse seditions) the seat of residence for the Lords Deputies: and thus much for the Counties of Conaght. LORDS OF CONAGHT. A S for the Lords of Conaght, wee finde it recorded in the Irish histories, that Turlogh O Mor O Conor ruled absolutely in old time this coun∣trey, and divided it wholly betweene his two sonnes, Cahel and Brien. But at the Englishmens first arrivall into Ireland, Rothericke bare rule, who stiled himselfe Monarch of Ireland, yet being put in feare with the great preparation for the English warre hanging so neere over his head, he betooke himselfe into the protection of King Henry the second, Rog. Hoveden. Anno 1175. pag. 312. without trying the hazzard of battell. But when as forthwith he brake his allegeance, and revolted, Miles Cogan was the first Englishman that gave the attempt upon Conaght, yet sped hee not in his enterprise. Howbeit that King of Conaght abovesaid, was driven to this exigent, as to acknowledge himselfe the King of Englands Liegeman, to serve him faithfully as his man, and to pay unto him yeerely of every tenth beast, one hide mer∣cateable, &c. And King John granted that the third part of Conaght should remaine unto him still, to bee held hereditarily for an hundred Markes. But William Fitz-A∣delme, whose posterity are called in Latin de Burgo, and Burke or Bourke in Irish, Ro∣bert Muscegros, Gilbert Clare Earle of Gloster, and William de Birmingham were the first English that fully subdued this country, and laboured to bring it to civill govern∣ment. And William Bourk and his lineall posterity, being called Lords of all Conaght, governed that province, together with Ulster, for a long time in great peace and tran∣quility, yea and raised thereout rich revenues, untill the onely daughter of William Burke, sole heire in grosse of Conaght and Ulster both, was matched in marriage with Leonell Duke of Clarence, King Edward the thirds sonne. But when as he abode for the most part in England, and the Mortimers his heires and successours looked but negligently to their patrimony and inheritance in Ireland, the Bourkes there allies, whom they had appointed as overseers of their lands, taking the advantage of their Lords absence, and presuming upon the troubles in England, despising the authority of lawes, entring into alliance with the Irish, and contracting marriage with them, seized upon all Conaght to their owne behoofe, and degenerating by little and little, have laid downe English civility, and taken up Irish behaviour. Whereof some, who fetched their pedegree from Richard Burke, were called Clan-Ricard ; others, Mac William Oughter, that is, The upper ; others, Mac William Eughter, that is, The lower ; even as they who in the countie of Maio were of greatest power and authority, affe∣cted to be tearmed simply Mac-William, as being a name full of honour, glory, and au∣thority, because they descended from William de Burgo, or Burke, whom I mentioned erewhile: under countenance of which name, they for a long time tyrannized over the poore inhabitants with most grievous exactions. ULTONIA, OR ULSTER. A LL the land beyond the mouth of the river Boyn, Meath, the County Longford, and the mouth of the river Ravie that stretcheth North∣ward, is counted the fifth part of Ireland, called in Latin Ultonia, and Ulidia, in English Ulster, in Irish Cui Guilly, that is, The Province Guilly, and of our Welsh Britans Ultw. Which Province was wholly inhabited in Ptolomees time by the VOLUNTII, DARNI, ROBOGDII, and ERDINI: A large country, bespred with many, and those very large loghes and lakes, shaded with many and thicke woods, in some places fruitfull, in others barren, howbeit fresh and green to see to in every place, and replenished with cattell. But as the countrey for want of manuring is growne to be rough, so the naturall dispositions of the people, wanting civill discipline, are become most wild and barbarous. Yet to the end that they might be kept within the bounds of their duty, who were wont to breake in sunder all bands of equity, of honesty, and of duty, the hether part of it was in times past divided into three counties, Louth, Downe, and Antrim: and now the rest is laid out into seven new counties, that is to say, Cavon, Fermanagh, Monaghan, Armagh, Colran, Tir-Oen, and Donegall or Tir-Conell, by the provident care of Sir Iohn Perot L. Deputy: John Perot Lord Deputy. 1585. who being notable and worthy man, well acquainted with the humours and haughty spirits of the Province, foreseeing that no policy would serve better to appease the tumults of Ireland, than to reduce these parts of Ulster into order, and to keepe them downe; going thither in a dangerous and ticklish time, when the King of Spaine hovered and gaped both for Ireland and England; with his gravitie and authority, whiles by barring all wrongs, hee did cut off the causes and quarrells of warre, brought all the Poten∣tates or Captaines of Ulster to this passe, that willingly they suffered their Seignio∣ries to bee divided into Counties, and Sheriffes to bee appointed for the government thereof. But he being within a while after recalled home, and climbing still higher unto honours, the heavie displeasure and envie of some, whom hee was not able to counterpoise, and his owne lavish tongue together (for unadvisedly he had let flye somewhat against the Princes Majestie, which to impaire in word is a capitall mat∣ter) plunged him headlong ere he was aware upon his owne destruction, as I have declared elsewhere more amply. THE COUNTIE OF LOUTH. T He county of LOUTH, Uriel, in Latin Urgalia. in ancient bookes written Luva and Luda, called in the Irish tongue Iriel or Uriel (if that be not rather a part of this territory) situate beyond Meth and the mouth of the river Boyn, turning full upon the Irish sea, runneth out with a shore much win∣ding into the North; the soile whereof is so full of forage and so fruitfull, that it soone answereth and recompenseth the husband mans toile and charges. Neere unto Boynes mouth is seated Drogheda, Tredagh. or Droghda, in English Tredagh, a fine towne, well peopled and frequented, so called of the bridge, and divided by the river Boyne running through it. Unto which King Edward the second, for Theo∣bald Verdons sake, granted licence for a mercate and Faire; the Kings confirmed ma∣ny and great liberties, Mellifont Ab∣bey. and among other a Mint. Neere unto this standeth Melli∣font Abbey founded by Donald a King of Uriel, and much praised by Saint Bernard: which Queene Elizabeth (when as the religious Monkes were before thrust out) gave unto Sir Edward More of Kent, for his good deserts both at home, and abroad in the warres. Ardeth seven miles from hence is a dry in-land towne well knowne: Dundalk. and above it Dundalk, with a commodious haven, and in times past strongly walled; which Ed∣ward Brus, brother to the King of Scots, who had proclaimed himselfe King of Ire∣land, burnt: but hee within a while after was with eight thousand two hundred of his men slaine neere thereabout. And in our remembrance Shan O Neale laied siege unto it, but straightwaies hee was forced with shame enough to dislodge. Eight miles from hence standeth Carlingford, Carlingford. a port also of good request and re∣sort: neither be there, to my knowledge, any other places in this county worth the naming. This Louth had for Earle Sir Iohn Birmingham an Englishman, Birmingham, who also is called Brimi∣cham. whom in reward of his martiall valour, when hee had discomfited and in a pitcht field slaine that Ed∣ward Brus, who assuming the title of King of Ireland for a time, had made soule work with fire and sword in Ireland, King Edward the second advanced to the honour of Earle of Louth, Earle of Louth. to have unto him and his heires males, and withall, the dignity of Baron of Athenry, to him and his heires. But this honourable title, as it began, so it ended in him; for he that in warre vanquished his enemies, was soone after in a tumult of rebellious people vanquished and slaine by his owne men in this territory, with ma∣ny other of his sirname, leaving no issue behinde him. But in our fathers remem∣brance King Henry the eighth honoured Sir Oliver Plonket with the title of Baron of Louth. Baron Louth. There remaine in this county, the Verdons, Tates, Clintons, Bellews, Dowdals, Gernons, Hadsors, Wottons, Brandons, Mores, Warrens, Chamberlanes, and very many besides of English blood; and of the Irish the Mac-Mathons, &c. THE COUNTY OF CAVON. T He county of CAVON lieth next unto Louth to the West, called in times past East Breanny, East Breany. the habitation of the O-Reilyes, who vaunt themselves to have had their beginning of the Ridleys in England, whereas in their whole course and maner of life they be meere Irish. O Reily. These O-Reileys not long since were of great power in horsemen: but to the end they might be that way lesse powerfull, Sir Henry Sidney in his policy divided their county into seven Baro∣nies; whereof the Lords out of that family should immediately hold the same by ser∣vice, in fee from the Crowne of England. They dwell scattering in piles and forts, not in towns. A Bishop they have of their own, and him a poore one, God he know∣eth, whose See is at Kilmore: Kilmore Bi∣shopricke. and yet is not he so poore as those Irish Bishops were, who had no other rents and revenues than three milch kine, which the parishioners exchanged for others new milch when they went dry, Poore Bishops. according as Adam Bremensis from their owne relation, when they returned by Germany out of Italy, learned and put downe in writing. THE COUNTY OF FERMANAGH. B Eyond Cavan West and North FERMANAGH presenteth it selfe, where sometimes the ERDINI dwelt, a country full of woods, and very boggish. In the midst whereof is that most famous and the greatest Meere of all Ireland, Lough-Ern. Logh Erne, stretching out 40. miles, bordred a∣bout with shady woods, and passing full of inhabited Ilands: whereof some containe an hundred, two hundred, and three hundred Acres of ground: ha∣ving besides such store of Pikes, Trouts, and Salmons, that the fishermen complain oftner of too great plenty of fishes, and of the breaking of their nets, than they doe for want of draught. This Lake spreadeth not from East to West (as it is de∣scribed in the common Maps) but as I have heard those say who have taken a long and good survey thereof, Bal-tarbet. first at Bal-Tarbet, which is a little towne farthest North of any in this county of Cavon ; it stretcheth from South to North foureteene miles in length, and foure in bredth. Anon it draweth in narrow, to the bignesse of a good river, for six miles; in the chanell whereof standeth Inis Killin, the principall castle in this tract, which in the yeere 1593. was defended by the rebels, and by Dowdall a most valiant Captaine won. Then turning Westward, it enlargeth it selfe most of all, Belek. twenty miles long, and ten broad, as far as to Belek: neere unto which is a great downefall of water, and as they terme it, that most renowned Salmons Leape. A common speech is currant among the inhabitants there by, that this Lake was once firme ground, passing well husbanded with tillage, and replenished with inhabi∣tants; but suddenly, for their abominable buggery committed with beasts, over∣flowne with waters, and turned into a Lake. The Almighty God (saith Giraldus ) Crea∣tor of Nature, judged this land privie to so filthy acts against Nature, unworthy to hold not only the first inhabitants, but any others for the time to come. Howbeit this wicked∣nesse the Irish Annales lay upon certaine Ilanders out of the Hebrides, who being fled out of their owne Countrey lurked there. Among the Lords in this tract, Mac-Gwir was most noble and powerfull, untill he overthrew himselfe and his state in the late rebellion. And they that be of that Sept dwell on both sides, yet so as that those beyond the Lake are reckoned of Ulster, and they on this side of Conaght. THE COUNTY MONAGHAN. A Long the Lough-Erne, on the East side, stretcheth out the Countie Mo∣naghan, mounting aloft with hills well attired with woods, but knowne by no towne at all (unlesse it be Monaghan, which imparted the name unto the whole country.) It is divided into five Baronies, & containeth Iriel, Dartre, Ferey, Loughty (which by authority of Parliament were for rebellion, given away from the Mac-Mahons ) with the little territory Donemain, which Queen Elizabeth bestowed upon Walter D'Evereux Earle of Essex. Those Mac-Mahons, Mac-Mahon. that is, if we interpret it out of the Irish language, The Sons of Ursus, or the Beare, ruled here as tyrannicall Lords a long time, and derive their Genealogy from Walter Fitz-Urse, Fitz-Urse. who imbrued his hands with the bloody murde∣ring of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. The most puissant of these, after the manner of that nation, tooke upon him to Lord it over the rest, and by way of excel∣lency was termed Mac-Mahon. About which preheminence, when as of late daies they of that Sept or Family were at most bitter debate, by way of hard words, open armes, foule practises, yea and close corruptions, Sir William Fitz-William the Lord Deputy came hither among them, 1590. and judicially convented Hugh-Roe, Mac-Mahon, whom he by his authority had set up in this Seigniory, and being upon his triall con∣demned of treason, caused him to be hanged: and to the end that he might suppresse for ever both the name and soveraignty of Mac-Mahon, he divided the territory be∣tweene the kinred of the said Hugh, and certaine Englishmen, to have and to hold after the English tenure, to them and theirs. THE COUNTY ARMAGH. O N the East side again lieth out in length the county of Armagh, so as that it is compassed as it were about with the river Neury by East, with the county of Louth by South, and with the Black-water by North. A County, as I have sundry times heard the Earle of Denshire Lord Lievtenant Generall say, Charles Blunt L. Mont-joy. that for a most rich and battle soile passeth all other parts of Ireland, insomuch as if any compost be laid upon it to make it more fruitfull, it scorneth and disdai∣neth, as one would say, the same, and becommeth barren. The first place in it that we meet with, Fewes. is Fewes, a little territory belonging to Turlogh Mac-Henry, one of the family of O-Neale, thicke set with woods, and by reason of loughs and bogs unpassable. Orry. Then have you Orry, as scarce of woods, where dwelleth O-Hanlan, and the fort Mont-Norris, Mont-Norris. built by Charles Baron Mont-joy when he was Lord Deputy, and so named in honour of Sir Iohn Norris, under whom he had served first, and was trained in military discipline. Armach. Eight miles from hence, neere unto the river Kalin, Ar∣mach maketh a poore shew, albeit it is the Archiepiscopall See, and Metropolitane of the whole Iland. The Irish talke much, that it was so called of Queen Armacha: but in mine opinion it is the very same that Bede nameth Dearmach, and out of the Scot∣tish or Irish language interpreteth it, The field of Okes. But it was named Drumsai∣lich, before that Saint Patricke had built there a proper faire City, S. Patricke. Vita Patricii. Marianus Scotus. for site, forme, quantity, and compasse, modelled out, as hee saith, by the appointment and direction of Angels. That Patricke I say, who being a Britan borne, and Saint Martins sisters sonne, named at his Baptisme Sucat, was sold into Ireland, where he became Heard∣man to King Miluc, afterwards was named by Saint German, whose disciple hee was, Magonius, as a Nurse-Father, out of a British word: and by Pope Caelestine, Pa∣tricius, as a Father of the Citizens, and by him sent over to catechize Ireland in the Christian faith: which notwithstanding some had received there before, as wee may gather out of an old Synodall, wherein is urged the testimony of Patricke him∣selfe, The Irish sha∣ving. against that tonsure or shaving of Priests which had beene used before his time in Ireland; whereby they were shaven onely on the fore part of the head, and not on the Crowne. Which manner of shaving he seemeth by way of contempt to father upon a certaine Swineherd of King Lagerius the sonne of Nell: and the wri∣ters of that age cried out, See Bed. l. 5. c. 22. that it was Simon Magus his shaving, and not S. Peters. In this place about the yeere of our salvation 610. Columbane built a most famous Mo∣nastery, out of which very many Monasteries afterwards were propagated by his disciples, both in Britain and in Ireland. S. Bernard in the life of Ma∣lachy. Of this Armach S. Bernard thus writeth. In honour of S. Patrick the Apostle of Ireland, who here by his life time ruled, and after death rested; it is the Archiepiscopall seat and Metropolitan City of all Ireland, and of so venerable esti∣mation in old time, that not only Bishops and Priests, but Kings also and Princes in gene∣rall, were subject to the Metropolitane thereof in all obedience, and he alone governed them all. But through the divellish ambition of some mighty Potentates, there was taken up a very bad custome, that this holy See should be obtained and held in hereditary succession; neither suffered they any to be Bishops, but such as were of their owne Clan, Tribe, and Family. Neither prevailed this execrable succession a little, but continued this wicked manner for the space well neere of fifteen generations. When in processe of time the Ecclesiasticall discipline in this Iland was growne loose, so as in townes and cities, there were translations and plurality of Bishops, according to the will and pleasure of the Metropolitane; for reformation of this abuse, Iohn Papyrio a Cardinall was sent hither from Pope Eugenius the fourth, as a namelesse writer then living wrote in these words. In the yeere of our Lord 1142. Iohn Papyrio, a Cardinall sent from Eugenius the fourth Bishop of Rome, together with Christian Bishop of Lismore Legate of all Ireland, came into Ireland. The same Christi∣an held a solemne Counsell in Mell, at which were present all the Bishops, Abbats, Kings, Dukes, and Elders of Ireland: By whose consent there were established foure Archbi∣shopricks, namely, of Armach, of Dublin, of Cassile, and Toam. Wherein sate and ruled at the same time, Gelasius, Gregorius, Donatus, and Edanus: and so the Cardinall, be∣stowing his blessing upon the Clergie, returned to Rome. For before that time, the Bi∣shops of Ireland were wont to be consecrated by the Archbishops of Canterbury, in regard of the Primacy which they had in Ireland. This did the Citizens of Dublin ac∣knowledge, when they sent Gregory elect Bishop of Dublin, unto Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury for to be consecrated, by these words, Antecessorum vestrorum Magi∣sterio, &c. that is, Unto the Magistracy of your Predecessors we willingly submitted our (Prelats) from which we remember that our Prelats have received their dignity Ecclesi∣asticall, &c. which appeareth for certain out of letters also bearing date of greater an∣tiquity, namely, of Murchertach King of Ireland, written unto Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, for the ordaining and enstalling of the Bishops of Dublin and of Water∣ford: likewise of King Gothrich unto Lanfrank his predecessor, in the behalfe of one Patrick a Bishop: of Lanfrank also unto Therdeluac a King of Ireland, unto whom he complaineth, That the Irishmen forsake and leave at their pleasure their wedded wives, without any canonicall cause, and match with any others, even such as be neere of kinne, either to themselves or the said forsaken wives; and if another man with like wickednesse hath cast off any wife, her also rashly and hand over head they joine with, by law of marri∣age, or fornication rather: an abuse worthy to be punished. With which vices if this na∣tion had not bin corrupted even unto these daies of ours, both the right of lineall suc∣cession among them had been more certain, and as well the gentry as the communal∣ty had not embrued themselves so wickedly with the effusion of so much blood of their owne kinred, about their inheritances and legitimation, neither had they become so infamous in these respects among forraine nations. But these matters are exorbi∣tant of themselves, and from my purpose. Long had not that Archiepiscopall dignity and Primacy beene established, when Vivian the Popes Legate confirmed the same againe; so that their opinion may seeme to be worthy of discredit and refutation, who affirme that the Archbishop of Armach had in regard of antiquity the priority and superiour place of the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury in the Generall or Oecumenicall Councells; whereas by the first institution hee is by many ages the latter. Neither according to the antiquitie of places are the seats in Councels appointed. But all Prelates, of what degree soever they be, Lib. 1. Ceremo∣niar sacrar. Sect. 14. sit among their Colleagues, according to their owne ordination, enstalling, and promotion. What time as that Vivian was Legate in Ireland, Sir Iohn Curcy subdued Armach, and made it subject to the English: and yet did he no harme then, but is reported to have beene very good and bountifull unto the Churchmen that served God there, and he re-edified their Church, which in our memory was fired and foulely defaced by the rebell Shan O Neale, and the city withall, so that they lost all the ancient beauty and glory, and nothing remaineth at this day but very few small watled cot∣tages, with the ruinous walls of the Monastery, Priory, and Primates palace. Among the Archbishops of this place, there goes the greatest fame and name of S. Malachy, the first that prohibited Priests marriage in Ireland, a man in his time learned and de∣vout, and who tooke no lesse of the native barbarousnesse of that country, than sea fi∣shes saltnesse of the seas, as saith S. Bernard, who wrote his life at large: also Richard Fitz-Ralfe, commonly called Armachanus, is of famous memory, who turned the edge of his stile about the yeere 1355. against the mendicant Friers, as detesting in Christians such voluntary begging. Neere to Armach, upon a rising hill, remain the reliques of an old castle ( Owen-Maugh they call it) which was, as they say, the anci∣ent habitation of the Kings of Ulster. More East glideth the Black-water (in the Irish tongue More, that is, Great ) which is the limit betweene this shire and Tir-Oen, whereof I am to speak in due place. In this country and about it Mac-Genis, O Han∣lan, O Hagan, and many of the sept of O-Neal, assuming unto them sundry additions and by-names, carry all the sway after a sort, and over-rule the rest. THE COUNTY OF DOWNE. E Astward now followeth the county of DOWNE, and that very large and fertile in soile, stretched out even as farre as to the Irish sea, rea∣ching on the North side to the Lake Eaugh, by a new name called Logh Sidney, and on the South to the county of Louth, from which the ri∣ver Newry severeth it. Upon this river, in the very first entrance into this shire, within our remembrance Sir Nicolas Bagnall Mareschall of Ireland, who by his conduct atchieved here divers exploits, and reduced the country to more civi∣lity, built and fortified a towne of the same name. Hard by it, the river called Ban∣thelesse, issuing out of the desert mountaines of Mourne, passeth through the coun∣try of Eaugh, which belongeth to the family of Mac Gynnis: Betweene whom and the O Neals, who tyrannized in Ulster, there fell in times past a controversie, whether they were vassals to O Neal, and whether they should find their followers and soul∣diers victuals, &c. (this kind of service they call Bonoghty. ) This hath unto it an Epi∣scopall See at Dromore, above which at the edge of Logh Eaugh, are the tracts of Kilwlto and Kilwarny, much encombred with woods and bogges. These lye inward∣ly: but by the maritime coast the sea doth so wind it selfe in, and with sundry Creeks and Bayes encroach within the land, yea and the Logh and Lake dilateth it selfe be∣side Dyffrin, a valley full of woods, the inheritance in old time of the Mandevils, af∣terwards of the Whites, in such sort that it maketh two bilands; Lecall Southward, and Ardes Northward. Lecall, a rich and battle ground, beareth out farthest into the East of any part of Ireland, and is the utmost Promontory or cape thereof, which the Mariners now terme Saint Iohns Foreland, Ptolomee calleth it ISANIUM, Isanium the Promontory. perhaps of the British word Isa, which signifieth Lowest. In the very streight whereof flou∣rished DUNUM, Dunum. Downe. whereof Ptolomee also made mention (though not in the right place) now named Down, a towne of very great antiquity, and a Bishops See, renowned by the tombe of Saint Patricke, Saint Brigid, and Saint Columb, upon which was writ∣ten this rude riming distichon: Hi tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno, Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius. At Doun these three lie buried in one tombe, Brigid, Patricke, and that devout Columb. Which monument of theirs, as the bruit runneth, was demolished by the Lord Leonard Grey, Deputy under King Henrie the eighth: and sure it is, that when he was arraigned for misgoverning, and condemned therefore to death, among other im∣putations he was charged, that he had profaned this Cathedrall Church of Saint Pa∣tricke. Saint Patricks Sepulcher. But as touching the Sepulcher of Saint Patricke, the religious Priests were at variance, like as the Cities of Greece in times past strove about the native country of the Poet Homer: These of Downe challenge it to themselves, and that upon the authoritie of the verses aforesaid: Those of Armagh put in their claime out of the words of Saint Bernard, which erewhile I alledged: The Monkes of Glastenbury in England averred it to be with them, and that out of the old Records and Evidences of their Abbey: and some Scots have likewise avouched, that as he was borne neere unto Glasco, so likewise he was enterred there at Kirk-Patrick. Into this Down, Sir Iohn Curcy, that Martiall Englishman, and (for a Warrior) extraordinarily devout to Godward, after hee had brought this country in subjection unto him, was the first that brought in the Benedictine Monkes: and he translated the Monasterie of Ca∣riche, which Mac Neal, Mac Eulef King of Ulster had founded in Erinaich neere unto S. Finins Fountaine, into the Isle called after his name Ynis-Curcy, and endowed the same with lands assigned for it. For before time the Monkes of Ireland, as those of ancient times in Egypt, whose maner and order that devour man Congell, that is by interpretation, A faire pledge, brought over into Ireland, being wholly given to prayer, earned for themselves and the poore their living, with the labour of their own hands. Howbeit, these Monasticall orders and customes (as all humane things) con∣tinued not long, when their maners and carriage grew to be worse, and riches had by little and little polluted piety, which as a mother, had formerly bred them. Robert Abbat of Molisime in Burgundie studied and endevoured earnestly in times past to reduce and set on foot againe the said ancient Discipline: Robert de Monts, de Im∣mutatione Or∣dinis Monacho∣ um. and perswaded his owne Disciples to live with their handy labour, to leave Tithes and Oblations unto the Priests that served in the Diocesse, to forbeare wearing of Breeches made of woven cloth, or of leather. But they labouring to the contrary, refused flatly to goe from the customes obser∣ved in the Monasteries of the West parts of the world, which were knowne for certaine, to have been instituted and ordained by Saint Maure scholar to Saint Benet, and by Saint Columban. But I have digressed too farre, now will I returne againe. By the sea-side stand Arglas, where Saint Patrick, by report, founded a Church: and Strangford, called in old time Strandford, a safe harbour, where the river Coyn with a great and violent streame breaketh into the Sea. Neere unto which, in the Biland Lecale, Queene Mary in her great bounty unto Noblemen liberally gave lands unto the Earle of Kildare. And here, of the English race the Russells, Audleys, Whites, and the Bagnells who came thither last, stoutly defend, among the wild and fierce Irish, not without danger, what they and their ancestours won in these parts. Ardes, the other Biland called The Andes, lieth over against to the North, seve∣red with a small chanell out of the Logh-Coin, which on the West side encloseth it, like as the sea on the East side, and the Bay of Knoc-Fergus on the North. You may resemble it to the bent of the arme, which by a very narrow Isthim or necke of land groweth to the rest of the Iland, like as an arme to the shoulder. The soile is every where passing good and bountifull, but only in the mids, where lieth out for twelve miles or thereabout in length, a moist, flat, and boggy plaine. The shore is sufficient∣ly bespred with small villages, and in times past had a most renowned Monasterie at the Bay of Knoc-Fergus, of the same institution, order, and name, as was that right ancient and famous Abbey in England neere unto Chester, Banchor Abbay. I meane, Banchor. Out of whether of these twaine that Arch-hereticke Pelagius came, it is uncertaine, whiles some will needs have him to spring from hence, others from that in Britaine: but neither of them grounding upon any certaine warrant of authority. Howbeit, cer∣taine it is that he was of Britaine, as may appeare by other testimonies, as also by this distichon of Prosper Aquitanus, Pelagius the Arch-heretick. inveying against his impiety. I procul insana impieta , artesque malignas Aufer, & authorem comitare exclusa Britannum. Avaunt far hence impiety, and lewd Arts take with thee, Once gone, with British sire of thine keep alwaies company. But touching this place, heare what S. Bernard saith: In the life of Malachias. A rich and mighty man gave a place called B anchor unto Malachy, to build, or rather to re-edifie there a Monastery. It had been ywis a most noble house before time, under the first founder and father Congel, breeding many thousand Monkes, and the head likewise of many Monasteries. A holy place in truth, and a breeder of many Saints, most plenteously fructifying unto God: so that one of the sons of that holy congregation, named Luan, is reported to have been the founder of an hundred Monasteries. Which I have beene more willing to relate, that by this one the reader may give a ghesse what a mighty multitude there was beside. Thus at length the sprouts thereof replenished Ireland and Scotland. From out of which S. Colum∣bane comming up to these parts of ours here in France, built the Monastery of Luxovium, which grew to a mighty multitude. And so great an Abbey by report this was, that the so∣lemnity of divine service held out continually in one quire after another: so that there was not one moment of time, night or day, without singing praises. Take all this to be spoken of the ancient glory of Banchor Monastery. Malachia both in regard of the noble name that it bare, and of the ancient dignity, especially liked this place, although it was destroi∣ed; as minding to replant it, like unto a certain garden or Paradise; as also because many bodies of Saints slept there. For, to say nothing of those that were buried in peace, it is re∣ported that 900. in one day were slaine by Pirats. Verily the possessions belonging to that place were great: But Malachias contenting himselfe only with the site of the holy place, surrendred the possessions and lands wholly to another: for from the time that the Mo∣nastery was destroied, there wanted not one to hold it with the livings thereto belonging: For they were ordained by election also, and called Abbats, keeping still in name, thought it were not so in deed, as it had been in old time. And when many gave advice not to alienate the possessions, but to retaine the whole together unto themselves, this professor of poverty agreed not thereto, but caused, according to the custome, one to bee chosen for to hold the same, reserving onely to himselfe and his the place, as I have before said. Moreover, within a few dates there was the Oratory or Church finished, of timber peeces made smooth but fitly and firmely knit together (a Scottish kind of work faire and beautifull enough.) Afterwards Malachy thought it good to have a Church built of stone, proportioned like to those which he had seene built in other countries. And when hee had begun to lay the foundation, the native inhabitants of the countrey began to make a wonder thereat, be∣cause there were not found in that land as yet such maner of buildings: and thereupon one cried out, O good Sir, what meane you to bring in this new fashion into our countries? Scots we are and not French. What vanity is this? what need was there of such worke, so superfluous, so proud, and so glorious? More inward, Bishoprick of Coner. hard by the Lake is the Bishops See of Conereth or Coner, where sat the said Malachy as Bishop. But what manner of flock this so holy a Pastor fed, listen unto S. Bernard. Malachy in the thirtieth yeere almost of his age, was brought in and presented a consecrated Bishop of Conereth, for this was the cities name. Now when as he began to execute his function according to his office, then perceived this man of God, that it was his lot to come not unto men, but unto beasts. No where had he to that time experi∣ence of such, in the most barbarous parts that ever he came unto: No where had he found for manners so froward, for rites so divellish, for faith so impious, for lawes so barbarous, for discipline so stiffe necked, and for life so filthy. Christians they were in name, and Pa∣gans in deed. Tithes and first fruits they gave none, lawfull marriage they contracted none, confessions they made none, to crave or to give pennance there could be found just none: And Ministers of the Altar there were very few or none: But what needs many words? where the very paucity and fewnesse among the lay Persons, was in maner idle and imploied about nothing, no fruit was to be expected by their duties and functions among so leud a people. For in the Churches there was heard neither voice of Preacher nor sound of singing. What should the Lords champion doe in this case? either hee must yeeld with shame, or bicker in jeopardy. But he who acknowledged himselfe to be a Shepherd, and not an hireling, chose rather to stand to it than to flye, ready to give his life for his sheep if it so behoved. And albeit they were all wolves and no sheepe, in the midst of wolves he stood as a fearlesse Shepherd, by all meanes casting about how to make of wolves sheepe. Thus wrote Saint Bernard ; and little better can he that is Bishop there at this day say, as I heare, of his wilde flocke hereabout. Savage. This Ardes, the Savages, an English family in times past held in possession: a∣mongst whom there goeth a great name of him, who said no lesse stoutly than plea∣santly, when he was moved to build a castle for his defence, That he would not trust to a castle of stones, but rather to a castle of bones, meaning thereby his owne bodie. Af∣terward the O-Neals wrested it out of their hands: who being attainted of high treason, by permission of Queene Elizabeth, Sir Thomas Smith Knight, and the Queenes Secretary planted a Colonie there not long since: a worthy adventure, but it sped unhappily. For after great expences defraied, the Irish by a traine caught his base sonne, whom hee had made Captaine and ruler thereof, and cruelly cast him to hungry dogges: for which barbarous cruelty, those most wicked wretches suffered afterward most grievous punishment accordingly, being killed and given unto Wolves to bee devoured. Above Ardes Westward the more Southerne Clan-boy, Upper Clane-Boy. that is, the Yellow Nation or Sept, or the kinred of Hugh the Yellow, a country very full of woods, reacheth as farre as to the bay of Knock-fergus, inhabi∣ted by the Sept of the O-Neales, and is counted the farthest territorie of this county of Downe. THE COUNTY OF ANTRIM. T HE next County in order unto Louth Northward, is that of AN∣TRIM, so called of Antrim a base townelet of small reckoning at all, had it not imparted the name unto the whole countrey, which lieth betweene the Bay of Knoc-Fergus, Logh Eaugh, and the river Ban. This Bay of Knoc-Fergus which Ptolomee tearmeth VINDERIUS, Knoc-Fergus. took name of a towne situ∣ate upon it, which the English call Knoc-Fergus, the Irish Carig-Fergus, that is, the Rock of Fergus, of that most renowned Fergus, who first brought the Scottish out of Ireland into Britaine, there drowned. This is well inhabited and more frequented than the rest in this coast, by reason of the commodious haven, although the block∣houses thereto be unfinished, having a fortresse pitched upon an high rocke, a ward of garrison souldiers to keepe the countrey in awe and good order, with an ancient palace converted now into Magazin. Nether Clane-Boy. Hard by it lieth the Nether Clane-Boy, which also was the habitation of O-Neales, notable for the death of that most lend rebell, Shan or Iohn O-Neal, who after many robberies and sacriledges committed, being in one or two skirmishes under the leading of Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy, vanqui∣shed and weakened, was brought to that exigent, that hee was resolved to goe unto the Deputy with an halter about his neck and submissely to crave pardon: but being perswaded by his Scribe to seeke first for aide of certaine Scots of the Islands, who under the conduct of Alexander Oge had encamped themselves here, and preyed in the countrey, hee came unto them, who gave him friendly entertainment, and pre∣sently massacred him and all his company in revenge of their kinsfolke whom hee had before slaine. By whose death the warre being ended, and himselfe with all those that went with him into the field attainted, Queene Elizabeth granted this Claneboy unto Walter D' Eureux Earle of Essex, who crossed over the seas hither, and, I wot not, whether under a goodly colour of honour (for chosen he was Gover∣nour of Ulster and Mareschal of Ireland) hee was by the politicke practice of some Courtiers finely packed away into a Country alwaies rebellious and untamed. But whiles with the expence of a mighty masse of money hee went about to reduce it to good order, after hee had beene crossed and tossed with many troubles both at home and abroad in the warres, hee was by untimely death taken out of this world, leaving unto all good men a wonderfull misse of himselfe, and this Country unto the O-Neales and Brian Carragh, of the Mac-Conells race, who since that time have gone together by the eares, and committed many murders one upon another, about the soveraignty of this Seigniory. Neere unto Knoc-Fergus there is a By-land, Isle of Magie. with a narrow necke (as it were) an∣nexed to the maine, which notwithstanding is called the Isle of Magie, taking up foure miles in length and one in bredth: wherein, as some suppose, flourished that Monasterie of Magio so highly praised by Bede: whereof I have made mention be∣fore in the County of Majo. Then the Glinnes, Glinnes. that is, the Valleys, begin at Older-Fleet, a bad road for ships, and run out a great length upon the sea. Bissets. This country belonged in ancient times to the Bissets Noblemen of Scotland, who when upon private grudges and quarrels they had made away Patricke Earle of Athol, were banished hither, and through the beneficiall favour of Henry the Third King of England, received Lands here. For John Bisset, who died in the beginning of Edward the First his reigne, had large possessions heere, and under King Edward the Second, Hugh Bisset for re∣bellion lost some of them. But in our fathers daies, the Highland Irish Scots, out of Cantire and the Hebrides, under the leading of James Mac-Conell Lord of Cantire in Scotland, made an entry upon the same, and he laying claime thereto challenged it as descended from the Bissets. Howbeit Shan O-Neale having slaine their Cap∣taine easily chased them away. Yet returned they, and in this tract committed con∣tinually robberies and outrages in cruell manner, yea and maintained seditious com∣motions, untill that even of late Sir John Perot Lord Deputy of Ireland brought first Donell Goran (who together with his brother Alexander was slaine by S r . Richard Bingham in Conaght) and afterward Agnus Mac-Conel, James Mac-Conell. the sonnes of James Mac-Conel, to that passe, that they betooke themselves to the Queene of Englands protection, and upon their humble suite received at her hands this county to bee held of her by service under certaine conditions, namely, to beare armes within Ire∣land under none other but the Kings of England, and to pay yeerely a certain number of cowes and hawkes, &c. Above this, The Rowt. Mac-Guilly. Surley Boy. Chairly Boy. as farre as to the river Bann, all the tract is called Rowte, the seat of the Mac-Guillies, a familie of good reputation in their county: which, notwithstanding the violence of the Islander Scots, and their continuall depredations, hath driven them into a narrow corner. For, Surley Boy, that is, Charles the Yellow, brother unto James Mac-Conel, who possessed himselfe of the Glines, became also in some sort Lord hereof; Donluse, untill that Sir John Perot Lord Deputy, having won Donluse Castle, a very strong pile, seated upon a rocke that hangeth over the sea, and severed from the Land with a deepe ditch, dispossessed him and all his. Which for all that, hee re∣covered the next yeere following by treason, after he had slaine Carie the Captaine thereof, who manfully defended himselfe. But the Lord Deputy sending against him Captaine Meriman an approved warrior, who slew the two sonnes of James Mac-Conell, and Alexander this Surley Boys son, so coursed him from place to place, and drave away his cattell the onely riches he had (for hee was able to number of his owne stocke 50000. cowes) so that Surley Boy rendred Donluse, came to Dublin, and in the Cathedrall Church openly made his submission, exhibited a supplication cra∣ving mercy, and afterwards being admitted into the Lord Deputies Great Cham∣ber, so soone as he saw the Picture of Queene Elizabeth upon a table, once or twice flung away his sword, fell downe at her feet, and devoted himselfe unto her Majesty. Whereupon being received into favour, and ranged among the subjects of Ireland, he abjured and renounced openly in the Courts of Chancery and Kings Bench all service and allegeance to any forraine Kings whatsoever: and he had given unto him by the bounteous liberality of Queene Elizabeth, foure territories ( Toughes they call them) lying from the river Boys unto the Bay, Don severig, Loghill, and Balla-monyn, with the Constableship of Donluse Castle, to him and the heires males of his body, to hold of the Kings of England, with these conditions, That neither hee nor his, nor yet his posterity serve in the warres under any forraine Prince without Licence; That they keepe their people from all depredations; That they furnish and finde twelve horsemen, and fortie footmen, at their owne charges for fortie daies in time of warre; and present unto the Kings of England a certaine number of cowes and hawkes yeerely, &c. THE COUNTIE OF COLRAN. B Eyond the Glynnes West, standeth Krine, which now they call the county COLRAN, of the principall towne therein. It lieth between the river Ban and Lough-foile, and confineth South upon the county of Tir-Oen. River Ban. This Ban, a passing faire river, as Giraldus saith (which the name also witnesseth) rising out of the mountaines of Mourn in the county of Downe, carrieth himselfe and his name into Lough E∣augh, or Lough-Sidney, a large Lake: which name for all that, after thirty miles or thereabout (for of so great length that Lake is esteemed to be) at his going forth in the end he resumeth againe at Tome castle, and being beset and shadowed along the sides with woods, Glan-Colkein. by Glancolkein, where by reason of thick woods, and unpassable bogges there is the safest place of refuge for the Scottish Ilanders and the rebels (and which the English felt, who pursued Surley Boy whiles hee lurked here) carrying a proud streame, Salmons. entreth into the sea, breeding Salmons in abundance above any other river in all Europe: because, as some think, it passeth all the rest for cleerenesse, in the which kinde of water Salmons take speciall delight. O-Cahan. In this part the O Cahans were of grea∣test authoritie; the principall person of which family O Cahan is thought to be one of the greatest of those Potentates, Uraights. The election of O-Neal. or Uraights as they terme them, that ought ser∣vice unto O Neal the Tyrant of Ulster: as who in that barbarous election of O Neal, which with as barbarous ceremonies is solemnized in the open aire upon an high hill, performeth this honourable service forsooth, as to fling a shooe over the head of the elected O Neal. Howbeit he is not of power sufficient to restrain the Scottish Ilan∣ders, who to save charges at home, Scottish Ilan∣ders. every yeere in Summer time flocke hither out of those hungry and barren Ilands (where is nothing but beggery) to get their living; ready upon every occasion and opportunity to maintain rebellions; insomuch as pro∣vided it hath been by law, under paine of high treason, that no person call them into Ireland, nor give them lodging or entertainment. But this county with other confining is escheated to the King, who gratiously purposing a civill plantation of those unreformed and waste parts, is pleased to distri∣bute the said lands to his civill subjects, and the city of London hath undertaken to plant Colonies here. THE COUNTIE OF TIR-OEN. B Eneath Colran lieth Southward the county of TIR-OEN, in old books named also Tir-Eogain, that is, if a man interpret it, The land of Eugenius, which name the Irish have contracted into Eogain and Oen. This is alto∣gether upland from the sea, divided towards the sunnes setting by the ri∣ver Liffer from Tir-Conell, toward the rising with the Logh Eaugh from the county of Antrim, and Southward with the Blackwater, which in Irish they call Aven More, that is, The great water, from the county of Armagh. A country though rough and rugged, yet fruitfull and very large, as which lieth out threescore miles in length, and thirty in bredth: divided by the mountaines called Sliew Gallen, into the Upper Tir-Oen Northward, Upper Tit-Oen. and the Nether Southward. In it are first Cloghar, Bishopricke of Cloghter. Dunganon. Baron of Dun∣ganon. a Bishopricke, and that a slender one; then Dunganon, the chiefe habitation of the Earles; which through the favour of King Henry the eighth gave the title of Baron unto Matthew sonne to the first Earle of Tir-Oen. And verily this is an house fairer built than commonly they bee in this county, but hath beene oftentimes by the Lords themselves defaced with fire, because it should not be burnt by the enemy: also Ublogahell, where O-Neal that most proudly ruleth and oppres∣seth Ulster was wont to be inaugurated after that barbarous manner and tradition of the countrey: Fort of Black-water. and the fort at Black-water on the river More, which hath sustained the variable changes and chances of warre, whiles there was no other way into this countrey, being the place of refuge for the rebels: but now it is neglect, ever since there was found another Ford more below, at which on both sides of the river Charles Lord Mount-joy Deputy erected new Sconces, when with hot warre hee pursued the rebels in these parts. Who likewise at the same time raised another garri∣son fort, called by his owne name Mont-joy, at the Lake Eaugh ( Logh Sidney in ho∣nour of Henry Sidney souldiers now terme it) which encloseth the West side of this shire, and is made, or much encreased by the river Bann, as I have said. Surely this is a goodly and beautifull Lake, passing fishfull, and very large, as stretching out thir∣ty miles or thereabout, as the Poet saith. —Dulci mentitur N rea fluctu. Fresh water though it bee, A sea folke thinke they see. And considering the variety of shew upon the bankes, the shady groves, the mea∣dowes alwaies greene, the fertile corne fields, if they be well manured; the bending and hanging hills, and the rills running into it, fashioned and shaped for pleasure and profit even by Nature her selfe, who seemeth as it were to be very angry with the in∣habitants there by, for suffering all to grow wild and barbarous through their lazie lithernesse. In the upper Tir-Oen stands Straban, a Castle well knowne, wherein dwelt in our daies Turlogh Leinigh of the sept of O-Neals, who after the death of Shan O-Neal, as I shall shew anon, by election of the people attained to the dignity of O-Neal: also some other Piles and fortresses of smaller reckoning, the which (like as else where in this Iland) be no more but towers with narrow loope-holes rather than windowes, unto which adjoine Hauls made of turfes, and roofed over head with thatch, having unto them belonging large Courts or yards fensed round about with ditches and hedges of rough bushes for defence of their cattell against Cow-stealers. But if this county have any name or glory at all, it is wholly from the Lords thereof, who have ruled here as Kings, or Tyrants rather: of whom there were two Earles of Tir-Oen, namely, Con O-Neale, and Hugh his nephew by his son Matthew. But of these I will speake more at large by and by, when I am to treat of the Earles and Lords of Ulster. THE COUNTIE OF DONEGALL OR TIR-CONELL. A LL that remaineth now behind in Ulster toward the North and South, was possessed in ancient times by the ROBOGDII and VENNICNII: but at this day it is called the County of DONEGALL or TIR-CONELL, that is, as some interpret it, The land of Cornelius, or as o∣thers, The Land of Conall, and in truth, Marianus plainly nameth it, Conallea. The county is all in a maner champian and full of havens, as bounded with the sea on the North and West sides beating upon it, and dis-joined on the East from Tir-Oen with the river Liffer, and from Conaght with the Lake Erne. Liffer neere un∣to his spring head, enlargeth his stream, and spreadeth abroad into a Lake, wherein ap∣peareth above the water an Island, and in it hard by a little Monastery, a very nar∣row vault within the ground, much spoken of by reason of I wot not what fearefull walking spirits, and dreadfull apparitions, or rather some religious horrour: which cave, as some dreame ridiculously, was digged by Ulysses when hee went downe to parley with those in hell. The inhabitants terme it in these daies Ellan u' Frugadory, that is, The Isle of Pur∣gatory, Patricks Pur∣gatory. and Saint Patricks Purgatory. For some persons devoutly credulous, affirme that Patrick the Irishmens Apostle, or else some Abbat of the same name, obtained by most earnest praier at the hands of God, that the punishments and torments which the godlesse are to suffer after this life, might here bee presented to the eye: that so he might more easily root out the sinnes which stucke so fast to his Countrimen the Irish; and withall their heathenish errours. But seeing that this place is named in Saint Patricks life, Regia. Reglis. Reglis, I would deeme it to be the other REGIA, that Ptolomee mentioneth: and the very situation of it in the Geographer implieth no lesse. Besides this Patrickes Purgatory, there was another Purgatorie also of Sir Brendan in this Island; but since I could not finde out the place, take here with you that only which I found, namely, Nechams Tetrastichon of it. Asserit esse locum solennis fama dicatum Brendano, quo lux lucida saepe micat. Purgandas animas datur hic transire per ignes, Ut dignae facie Iudicis esse queant. If common fame say true, a place of Brendan taking name There is, and often times cleere lights doe shine within the same. The soules have licence here to passe through Purgatory fire, That worthily before that Judge, they may at length appeare. Where this river Liffer augmented by other waters comming unto it, approach∣eth neerer to the sea, it spreadeth out againe into a Lake, which Ptolomee called LO∣GIA, and now they usually terme it Logh Foile and Logh Der, whereupon Necham hath these verses. Logh Der aquis dives Lacus est, Ultonia novit, Commodus indigenis utilitate placet. Logh Der a Lake in waters rich, this Ulster knoweth well, Commodious, and pleasing much those that about it dwell. Derry. Hard by this, there flourished sometime Derry a Monasterie and Episcopall See; where in the yeere 1566. Edward Randolph, renowned for his long service in the warres, spent his life in the behalfe of his countrey to his everlasting fame, and gave Shan O-Neal (who had then assembled and armed all the power he could possibly a∣gainst the English) such an overthrow, as that he could never after recover the losse he then sustained. But now of late Sir Henry Docwra knight, who in the warres of Ireland quit him so well, that with great praise he hath approved his singular valour and martiall skill, brought hither first a garison, and afterward planted here a Co∣lony, to bridle the Earle of Tir-Oens insolent pride: and established and settled the same with so good orders, that it both standeth in good steed for helpe against the rebells, Robogdii. and also traineth the barbarous people to their duties. The ROBOGDII placed above LOGIA held all that Northren sea coast of Ireland, where O Dog∣herty an obscure Potentate had great sway. Amongst these, Robogh a little Episco∣pall towne retaineth the expresse footings of the old name Robogdii. Robogdium Promontory. Which should be that promontory ROBOGDIUM, unlesse it be Faire Foreland, I know not From hence the utmost shores all rockie bend backe againe by the mouth of Swilly Lake, which Ptolomee seemeth to call ARGITA. Beyond these more Westward were the VENNICNII seated, Vennicnii. where Mac Rwyn Faid, Mac Swyn Netoeth, and Mac Swyn Bannigh have great lands and large possessi∣ons. Among these Ptolomee placeth the river VIDUA, River Vidua. Boreum Pro∣montory. which now is called Crodagh, and the Promontory VENNICNIUM, which they now call Rams-head, and the Fore∣land BORAEUM, now S. Helens head. Upon the shore as it twineth backe from hence Southerly, Calebeg affordeth an Haven and commodious harbour for sailers: then appeare the ruins and rubbish of Sligah Castle, Sligah. which Maurice Fitz-Girald Lord Justice of Ireland built about the yeere 1242. when he had made himselfe Lord of this country. But Iohn Fitz-Girald the first Earle of Kildare was dispossessed of this castle and a goodly inheritance in this tract, fined also in a great sum of money, for that hee had raised a civill and dange∣rous war against the Earle of Ulster. Lower yet, Donegall. and not far from the mouth of Logh Earne, Donegal, that is, the towne of the Gallicians of Spaine, with an Abby sheweth it selfe, whence this county when it was made a county tooke the name. There have beene rulers over this territory for these many ages they of the house of O-Donel, and those extracted from the same stock that the family of O-Neals, nei∣ther had they any other title than O-Donel, O-donell. and Lords of Tir-Conell. For the getting of which title, and that they might be by a certaine election of the people inaugura∣ted with their due complements at a stone beside Kilmacrenan, they were at deadly discord, and committed outrages one upon another, untill that King James not long since by his honourable Letters Patents conferred the honour, title, and stile of Earle Tir-Conell upon Rory O-Donell, the brother of that Hugh the rebell, who being fled out of his countrey died in Spaine; and this Rory his successour practising new trea∣son against King James his advancer, upon the terrour of a guilty conscience fled the realme in the yeere 1607. and died at Rome. The ancient inhabitants of this Ulster, like as the rest of all Ireland throughout, were by one name in times past cleped SCOTI, Scoti. and from hence carried they over with them the name of Scots into the North parts of Britain. For as Giraldus writeth, about the yeere of salvation foure hundred, six sons of Mured King of Ulster seized upon the North parts of Britain, whereupon it was by a speciall and peculiar name called SCO∣TIA. And yet it appeareth by the Scottish Annales that this happened long before. Also Ferguse the second, who re-established the kingdome of Scots in Britain, came from hence, In the life of S. Patrick. unto whom Patrick had prophesied by way of divination or Soothsay∣ing, in these words: Although thou seemest at this day base and contemptible in the eies of thy brethren, thou shalt shortly be the Prince and Lord of them all. And to avow the credit and authority of this prediction, the said writer addeth moreover and saith: No long space of time after this, Fergus, according to the Holy mans prophesie, obtained the soveraignty in all that land, and his seed reigned for many generations together. From his stemme proceeded that most valerous King Edan, the sonne of Gabran, who subdued Scotland that is called Albanach, whose posterity in lineall descent and succession reign∣eth there still. The first Englishman that in the reigne of King Henry the second attempted this countrey was Sir Iohn Curcy, Earles of Ul∣ster. who having by force won Downe and Armach, either by dint of sword conquered, or by surrender gat the whole into his owne hands, and was the first that was stiled Earle of Ulster: but when his great exploits and fortunate archievements had wrought him such envie, that through his owne vertues and o∣ther mens vices he was banished out of the Realme, Hugh Lacy, the second sonne of Hugh Lacy Lord of Meth, who had commandement to pursue him by force and armes, was by King John appointed his successour, being created Earle of Ulster, by the sword, An. 7. Ioannis. of which honour notwithstanding the same King afterward deprived him for his tumultuous insolency: and hee was in the end received into favour againe. But for the sounder testimony hereof, it were good to exemplifie the same word for word out of the records of Ireland. Hugh de Lacy sometime Earle of Ulster, held all Ulster (exempt and separate from all other counties whatsoever) of the Kings of England in chiefe by service of three Knights so often as the Kings service was proclaimed: and be held all Pleas in his owne Court, that pertaine to a Iustice and Sheriffe, and held a Court of Chancery of his own, &c. And afterward all Ulster came into the hands of our Soveraigne Lord K. Iohn, by the forfeiture of the foresaid Hugh: unto whom after that K. Henry the third demised it for terme of the said Hughs life. And when Hugh was de∣ceased, Walter de Burgo did that service unto Lord Edward K. Henries son, Lord of Ire∣land before he was King. And the same Lord Edward feoffed the aforesaid Walter in the said land of Ulster, to have and to hold unto the same Walter and to his heires, by the ser∣vice aforesaid, as freely and wholly as the above named Hugh de Lacy held it, excepting the advowsons of Cathedrall Churches and the demesne of the same, also the Pleas of the Crowne, to wit, Rape, Forstall, Firing, and Treasure Trouve, which our sove∣raigne Lord K. Edward retained to himselfe and his heires. This Walter de Burgo, who was Lord of Conaght, and Earle of Ulster, begat of the only daughter of Hugh de La∣cy, Richard Earle of Ulster, who after hee had endured many troubles and calamities died in the yeere 1326. Richard had issue Iohn de Burgo, who departed this life be∣fore his father, having begotten upon Elizabeth, sister and one of the heires of Gil∣bert Clare Earle of Glocester, William, who succeeded after his grandfather. This Wil∣liam being slain by his own men when he was young, left behind him a little daughter his only child, See pag. 624. and 725. who being married unto Leonell Duke of Clarence bare one daughter likewise, the wife of Edmund Mortimer Earle of March, by whom the Earledome of Ulster and Seigniory of Conaght came unto the Mortimers, and from them together with the kingdome of England unto the house of Yorke: and afterward Edward the fourth King of England adjoined it unto the Kings Domaine or Crowne land. And when as at the same time England was divided into sides and factions, whiles the civill warre grew hot, and the English that abode here returned out of Ulster into England to follow the factions, O-Neal and others of Irish blood seized these coun∣tries into their own hands, and brought them to such wildnesse and savage barbarisme, as it exceeded: In so much as this province which in times past paied a mighty masse of money unto their Earles, scarcely ever since yeelded any coin at all unto the Kings of England. Ireland negle∣cted. And verily in no one thing whatsoever (pardon this my over-boldnesse) have the Kings of England beene more defective in piety and policie, than that they have for these so many ages seen so slightly to this Province, yea and to all Ireland, in the pro∣pagation of religion, establishing the weale publike, and reducing the life of the inha∣bitants to civility: whether it was for carelesse neglect, sparing, or a fore-cast of dammage, or some reason of state, I am not able to say. But that the same may be no longer thus neglected, it seemeth of it selfe by good right to importune most earnest∣ly, being an Iland so great, so neere a neigbour, so fruitfull in soile, so rich in pastures more than credible, beset with so many woods, enriched with so many mineralls (if they were searched) watered with so many rivers, environed with so many havens, lying so fit and commodious for failing into most wealthy countries, and thereby like to bee for impost and custome very profitable: and to conclude, breeding and rearing men so abundantly as it doth, who considering either their mindes or their bodies might be of singular emploiment for all duties and functions as well of warre as of peace, if they were wrought and conformed to orderly civility. I Intimated even now, that I would speak touching the O-Neals, who carri∣ed themselves as Lords of Ulster; and I promised not long since a friend of mine, that I would write of their rebellions raised in our age. And verily I will performe my promise to his Manes, whom whiles he lived I observed with all respect, and being now in heaven I will not forget. Thus much onely I will promise by way of Preface, that I have compendiously collected these matters out of my Annales, and here conjoined them, which there are severed and divi∣ded according to their severall times: and withall, that whatsoever I shall write, is not upon uncertaine rumours, but gathered summarily from out o their owne hand writings who managed those affaires, and were present in the actions: And this will I doe with so sincere an affection to the truth, and so uncorrupt fidelity, that I doubt not but I shall have thanks at their hands who love the truth, and desire to understand the late affaires of Ireland, and not in∣curre the blame of any, unlesse they be such as having done ill, take it not well if themselves be accordingly censured. THE O-NEALES, AND THEIR REBELLIONS IN OUR TIME. T O say nothing of that GREAT NEALE, who ruled by force and armes in Ulster, and a great part of Ireland, before the comming of Saint Patricke ; nor of those in the middle times, who were but of meane note and memoriall to speake of; this family, after the arrivall of the English in Ireland, lay close and obscure in remote lurking corners, unlesse it were when Edward Brus brother to Robert King of Scotland, na∣med himselfe King of Ireland. For then in a troublesome time Dovenald O-Neale started and rowsed himselfe out of his lurking holes, and in his missives unto the Pope used this title in his stile, Scoto-Chroni∣con lib. 12. cap. 26. Dovenald O-Neale King of Ulster, and in right of inheritance the undoubted heire of all Ireland. But after these stirres and troubles were laid, this new King soone vanished away; and Dovenalds posterity pluckt in their hornes and hid their heads, untill that, whiles England was all in a combustion, kindled by the furious firebrands of civill warres betweene the houses of Yorke and Lancaster for the Imperiall Crowne, those English that served and li∣ved here, abandoning Ulster, and committing it to the keeping of the O-Neals, re∣turned home to follow the factions. For then Henry O-Neal, the sonne of Oen or Eugenius O-Neal, espoused the daughter of Thomas Earle of Kildare: and his son Con-More, that is, Con the great, married the daughter of Girald Earle of Kildare his mothers brother. These supported by the powerfull authority of the Earles of Kildare (who verily for many yeeres were Deputies of Ireland) carried their heads aloft, tyrannizing cru∣elly upon the people, & transported with the insolent spirit of pride, disdained all the titles of Prince, Duke, Marquesse, and Earles, in comparison of the name of O-Neal. Con the sonne of Con, surnamed Bacco, because hee halted, succeeded his father in the dignity of O-Neale, who cursed all his posterity, in case they either learned to speake English, or sowed wheat, or built houses: being sore affraid, left by these inducements the English might bee allured to enter againe into their Lands and pos∣sessions: often saying that language bred conversation, and consequenly their con∣fusion; that wheat gave sustenance with like effect: and by building they should doe but as the crow doth, make her nest, to be beaten out by the hawke. When as the greatnesse of this Con O-Neale became very much suspected of King Henry the Eight, and the Kings power having now troden under foot the fa∣milie of Kildare, in whose rebellion O-Neale had engaged himselfe deepe, grew dreadfull to O-Neale also: into England he comes, and there renouncing the name of O-Neale, put his whole estate into the Kings hands: which within a while after was granted againe by letters Patent under the great seale of England, to hold as in fee, together with the title of the Earle of Tir-Oen, to him and to Matthew his false reputed sonne, and to the heires of their bodies lawfully begotten. And Matthew at the same time was created Baron of Dunganon. This Matthew being taken untill he was fifteene yeeres old for the sonne of a blacksmith in Dundalk, was by the said Smiths wife, Shan or John O Neale. whom Con had sometime kept as his concubine, tendred unto Con as his owne sonne, and hee accepting him for his owne sonne in deed, rejected John ( Shan they call him) with the rest, whom he had begotten on his owne lawfull wife. Hereupon Shan, seeing a bastard preferred before him, so much made of, and highly honoured, suddenly set his heart wholly against his father, and withall burned in such hatred with most bitter malice against Matthew, that hee murdered him out of the way, and so plagued and vexed his father with injurious indignities, whiles he went about to deprive him of his Seigniorie, disseized him of his dwelling house, and stript him out of all he had, that the old man for very thought and griefe of heart pined away, and died. Straightwayes Shan being chosen, proclaimed and inau∣gured O-Neal, by an old shooe cast over his head, seized upon his fathers inheritance, and with all diligence sought after the sonnes of Matthew, that he might be secu∣red from them; but they were fled and gone. Howbeit Brian the eldest sonne not long after was slaine by Mac-Donel Totan one of the O-Neals race, suborned as some give it out, by Shan to doe that feat. Hugh and Cormack by the meanes and helpe of the English escaped, and yet remaine alive. Shan having thus gotten all into his owne hands (as hee was a man cruell and barbarous) began to exercise excessive cruelty over the great men of Ulster, and made his vaunt, that Mac-Gen∣nys, Mac-Guyr, Mac-Mahon, O Reali, O-Hanlon, O Cahan, Mac-Brien, O Hagan, O Quin, Mac-Canna, Mac-Carton, and all the Mac-Donels, the Galloglasses, were his subjects and vassels. And when as Sir Henry Sidney Justice for the time being, in the absence of the Earle of Sussex Lord Deputy, expostulated with him about these points, he answe∣red, that hee, the undoubted and lawfull sonne and heire of Con O-Neale, as being borne of his lawfull wife, had entred upon his fathers inheritance: that Matthew was a Blacke-Smiths sonne of Dundalke, and by the said Smith begotten, and borne after his mariage with Alison his Wife, yet craftily obtruded upon Con as his son, there∣by to intervert another way, and to alienate the inheritance and honour of O-Neale : which howsoever he would endure, yet none besides of the Sept of O-Neals would ever beare and digest. As for the letters Patent of King Henry the eighth, they were of no validity, considering that Con had no right in that hee surrendred into the Kings hands, longer than his owne life: neither could he surrender up the same without the consent of the Nobles and people of Ulster by whom hee had beene elected O-Neale : Neither were such Patents of any force, unlesse there were an undoubted heire apparent of the family authentically signified before by inquisition and the oath of twelve men, which in this matter was never certified. Also, that himselfe was by law both of God and man the true heire, as being the first begotten sonne of his father, lawfully borne in wedlocke; that with the gene∣rall assent and consent of Peeres and people he was chosen, declared, and proclaimed O-Neale according to the ancient law of Tanistry, whereby a man at his full yeeres is to be preferred before a boy, and an uncle before that nephew, whose grandfa∣ther survived the father: neither had he arrogated unto himselfe any authority over the Peeres or Nobles of Ulster, other than his ancesters (as hee was able to prove by plaine proofes produced) had exercised in times past out of minde most right∣fully. Howbeit, soone after he outraged and overthrew O-Raily in the field, tooke Cal∣lagh O-Donell Lord of Tir-Conell prisoner, and cast him with his children into prison, carried away his wife, on whom hee begat children in adultery, seized upon his for∣tresses, lands, and goods, and bare himselfe as absolute King of all Ulster. But so soone as Thomas Earle of Sussex the Lord Deputy came with a power in∣to the field for to abate this insolency of his, Thomas Earle of Sussex Lord Deputy. hee was strangely terrified, and by the perswasion of Girald Earle of Kildare, whom Queene Mary had restored to his for∣mer estate, came into England unto Queene Elizabeth, cast himselfe prostrate at her feet in all submissive and humble maner, and being received with all curtesie, after he had promised his allegeance, returned home, and for a while in his feeding and appa∣rell conformed himself to all kind of civility: he assailed the Scottish and drave them quite out of Ulster, slew Iames Mac-Conell their leader, kept himself and all his people in good order, and the poorer sort he carefully protected from wrongs: Howbeit he tyrannized most cruelly and insolently over the Nobility: who when they had cra∣ved aid of the L. Deputy for to represse his intolerable violence; he thereupon grow∣ing more outrageous, in furious maner with fire and sword drave Mac-Guir Lord of Fermanagh (who underhand had accused him) out of house and home, set fire upon the Metropolitane Church of Armach, and burnt it, yea and laied siege unto Dundalik on every side: but his enterprise was made frustrate through the valour of the souldiers there in garrison, and William Sarfield Maior of Dublin, who went forth a∣gainst him with the very floure of choice Citizens. Howbeit the neighbour Coun∣tries round about he harried and spoiled in all manner of hostility. Then Sir Henry Sidney the Deputy, Sir Henry Sid∣ney Lord De∣puty. to restraine and bridle the boldnesse of the man, came himselfe in person with an army into the field against him, and by po∣liticke forecast sent before Edward Randolph, 1565. an old approved and renowned Co∣ronell, with seven ensignes of foot-men, and a cornet of horsemen, by sea into the North side of Ireland; who encamped at Derry by Logh-foil, that he might charge upon the backe of the Rebels. Which hee fearing, came thither speedily with all the power and forces that hee had, to remove him: But Randolph in a pitcht field gave him battell, and there manfully fighting, with honour lost his life in his Countries service, but gave him withall such an overthrow, that never after he was able to make head againe: and being elsewhere in light skirmishes foiled, and by little and little forsaken of his owne followers, hee was minded with an halter tyed about his necke humbly to beseech the Lord Deputy his protection and mercy. But being by his Secretarie perswaded first to try the friendship of the Scots, who under the conduct of Alexander Oge, that is, the younger, held their standing Summer Campe in Claneboy, having sent before hand Surley Boy A∣lexanders brother, whom hee had kept prisoner a long time, to prepare the way, hee came unto them with the wife of O-Donell whom hee kept, was kindely wel∣commed, and admitted with some few into a tent: where after they had beene in their cups, they brake out into a brawle about Iames Mac-Conell Alexanders bro∣ther, whom Shan had slaine, and also about the honesty of Iames his sister, whom Shan had married and cast off: 1567. by which time Alexander Oge, and his brother Mac-Gillaspic being hot set upon revenge, after a signall given, with their drawn swords set upon Shan, and with many a wound hacked and hewed him to death: whereby the Province recovered, after grievous oppressions and warre, the benefits of wished peace. Within a while after a Parliament was holden at Dublin, where by the authority of all the States of the Realme there assembled, Shan was attainted, and all the Seigniories, lands, and goods which hee and his followers had, were invested in Queene Elizabeth, her heires and successours. And a law was enacted, that from that day forward no man should assume unto him the name and title of O-Neale. And yet shortly after Turlogh Leinigh, a brothers sonne of Con-Mor O-Neale afore∣said, tooke it upon him by a popular election, being a man farre stept in yeeres, and therefore more calme and quiet, and so much the rather, because hee stood in feare of Shan O-Neals sonnes, and Hugh Baron of Dunganon, the sonne of Matthew, al∣though he had given unto the said Hugh his daughter in marriage; whom hee not∣withstanding quickly after did cast off and repudiate, taking another wife. This Turlogh being most obsequious and dutifull unto the Queene of England, put the English to no trouble at all; but hee molested O-Donell his neighbour and the Scots of the Ilands, and in an encounter slew Alexander Oge, who had killed Shan O-Neale. Hugh O-Neal Earle of Tir-Oen. Hugh the sonne of Matthew, commonly called Baron of Dunganon, who had lived a long time one while concealed in his owne countrey, other whiles in England in the retinue of Noble men, began now to put himselfe forth, and to raise himself out of that obscure condition, when Elizabeth had given him command of a company of horsemen in the warre against the Earle of Desmond, then in rebellion, and assigned to him a pension of a thousand Markes by the yeere. In that warre hee acquitted himselfe valiantly in all places against the rebells; and at length exhibited a suppli∣cation in the Parliament house; That by vertue of letters patents, granted unto his Grandfather by King Henry the eighth, he might be admitted to the title and place of the Earle of Tir-Oen, and settled in his ancestours inheritance. The title and place of Earle of Tir-Oen was presently granted: but as touching the inheritance, conside∣ring that upon the forfaiture and attainture of Shan O-Neale the Kings of England were invested therein, the matter was referred unto Queene Elizabeth: who most bountifully granted the same to him, for his faithfull service performed, and to be per∣formed. Yet so, as that the country should be first surveied, and laied out into severall divisions, one or two places fit for garisons reserved, and namely, the fort at Blackwa∣ter, that good order might be taken for the maintenance of the sons of Shan and Tur∣logh, and that he should not be permitted to have any authority at all against the no∣blemen his neighbours without the county of Tir-Oen. These conditions he most willingly accepted, and rendred very great thanks, accordingly promising to perform whatsoever he was able, with diligence, authority, study, and endevour, in regard of so great benefits received: and verily he failed not in his promise, nor omitted any duty that might be expected from a most loiall subject. A body he had able to en∣dure travell, watching and fasting: his industry was singular, his courage in warre great, and answerable to the most important affaires: good skill he had in martiall feats, and a profound wit and deep reach to dissemble and carry his businesse closely: in so much as even then some there were who gave this prediction of him, That he was born either to the exceeding good, or as great hurt of Ireland. And such proofes he made of his valour and fidelity, that Turlogh Leinigh at the Queenes intercession resigned up unto him his government upon certaine conditions. After whose decease he usurped unto himselfe the title of O-Neal, which by law was a capitall crime; but excused himselfe colourably, because others should not enter upon the farre: and promised solemnely to renounce it quite, yet laboured hee most earnestly, that hee might not be urged thereunto by any oath. 1588. Not long after, when that most puissant Armada of Spaine, which had in vaine given the attempt upon England, was put to flight, many ships in their returne home∣ward were cast away and lost in the Vergivian sea, and many of the Spaniards after shipwracke were cast on shore; some of whom Tir-Oen is reported to have en∣tertained and lodged, yea and to have consulted and complotted with them about en∣tring into a secret confederacy with the King of Spaine. For which practice Hugh Ne Gaveloc, that is to say, Hugh in the fetters (sirnamed so because he had been kept so long in fetters) a base sonne of Shan O-Neal informed against him, and that upon no light but pregnant presumptions: whom the Earle afterward intercepted, and commanded to bee strangled, but hardly could he finde any one, that for the re∣verent regard of the O-Neals blood, would lay hands upon him. For which barba∣rous and inhumane murdering of his cousin german, he was charged in England; but the Queene of her royall clemency, and for the hope that she had conceived of the Earle, craving with repentance forgivenesse of this fault, and submitting him∣selfe to divers good orders, for his obedience, pardoned him, to the great griefe of some good men. But this soone after more grieved him, yea pricked (as it were) and sore galled him, that the Deputy had suppressed the name of Mac Mahon in the country next adjoyning unto him; and withall to abate and weaken the power of that mighty family, had divided the country among many. He I say hereupon con∣ceived a feare, lest the same would befall unto him, and other Chieftanes of Ulster. At which very time, there began some secret grudges, and heart burnings to arise be∣tween the Earle and Sir Henrie Bagnall the Marshall, whose sister the Earle had car∣ried away and married. The Earle complained, that whatsoever he had with the losse of his blood and painfull travell reduced to the obedience of the Prince, the Marshall, and not he, reaped the fruit and gaine thereof: that the Marshall by subor∣ning most base and vile persons as witnesses, had falsely brought him into question for high treason, had incited Sir William Fitz-Williams, then Lord Deputy, his dead∣ly enemy, by corruptions and bribery to worke his destruction; and that he lay in waite to take away his life. And in very truth the Deputies information against the Earle found credit in the Court of England, untill the said Earle wrote his letters, and offred judicially to be tried either in England or in Ireland. This is for certain known, that much about this time, he together with the chiefery, or greatest men of Ulster, by secret parlees combined in an association, that they would defend the Romish religi∣on (for Religion now a daies is made the mantle for all rebellion) that they would in no wise admit Sheriffes or Garrison souldiers in their Territories, and mutually main∣tain one anothers right, yea and withstand all wrongs offered by the English. The first Champion thrust forward to sound the alarum, was Mac-Gwyr, a man of a turbulent spirit: he by way of preying all before him maketh a road into Conaght, accompa∣nied with Gauran a Priest, who being ordeined by the Pope Primate of Ireland, commanded him in the name, and with the helpe of God to try his fortune, and to fight the Lords battell, assuring him of most happy successe: yet fell it out otherwise; for Mac-Gwyr, through the valour of Sir Richard Bingham, was discomfited and put to flight, and the Primate with others slaine. Soone after, Mac-Gwyr brake out into open rebellion; whom the Earle himselfe (together with the Marshall) in a shew of du∣tifull attendance pursued; and in this service, with great commendation of his for∣wardnesse, was wounded in the thigh. Howbeit wholly intentive to provide for his own security, he intercepteth the sons of Shan O-Neale, and makes them sure for do∣ing any harme: neither would he by any meanes (being requested thereto) set them at liberty, but minding another matter, maketh most grievous complaints of the inju∣ries offered unto him by the Deputy, the Marshall, and the garrison souldiers: which notwithstanding, within a while after he carried so covertly, that as if he had forgot∣ten all quarels, he came under safe conduct unto the Deputy, submitted himselfe, and after hee had professed all manner of dutifull obedience, returned home with great commendation. When as now Sir William Fitz Williams, the Lord Deputy was re∣voked home out of Ireland, Sir William Russell succeeded in that office. Unto him repaired the Earle of his own accord, exhibited an humble submission, upon his knees to the Lord Deputy, wherein he dolefully expressed his great griefe that the Queen had conceived indignation against him, as of one undutifull and disloyall. Hee ac∣knowledged that the late absenting himselfe from the state was disagreable to his obedience; albeit it was occasioned by some hard measures of the late Lord Depu∣tie, as though he and the Marshall had combined for his destruction. He acknowledged that the Queene advanced him to high title, and great livings, that she ever upheld him, and enabled him, that shee, who by grace had advanced him, was able by her force to subvert him, and therefore if he were voide of grati∣tude, yet he could not be so voide of reason, as to worke his owne ruine. Further∣more, he made liberall promises that he would most willingly do whatsoever should be enjoyned him, (which hee also had promised in his letters sent unto the Lords of the Councell in England) and earnestly besought that he might be received into favour againe with the Queene, as before time, which he had lost, not by any desert of his owne, but through the forged informations and suggestions of his adversaries. At the same time, Bagnall the Marshall was present in the place, who exhibited arti∣cles against the Earle, and accused him, that hee had underhand suborned and sent Mac-Guir, with the Primate above named into Conaght, that hee had complotted se∣cretly with Mac-Guir, O-Donel and other conspirators, and had aided them by Cor∣mac-Mac-Baron the Earles brother, and Con the Earles base son, and some of his ser∣vants, in the wasting of Monaghan, and besieging of Inis-Kellin, and by means drawn away the Captaines of Kilulio and Kilwarny, from their loialty and obedience to the Queen. Hereupon it was seriously debated among the Councellors of the kingdome, whether the Earle should be staied to make his answer or no? The Deputy thought good that he should be detained. But when it was put to question generally, the more part, either upon a vaine feare, or forward inclination to favour the Earle, were instant to have him dismissed, & the matter to be put off unto a further day of hearing, pretending certaine waighty considerations, and that the Articles exhibited were without proofe or time. Thus the Deputie in a sort was forced to yeeld to the ex∣perience of the Councell, and the Earle was permitted to depart, and his accusers there present had no audience. Which troubled and disquieted the Queen not a little, considering that his wicked designements and acts were now apparent to every one, and the Queene her selfe had given warning afore hand, that he should be detained untill he had cleered himselfe of those imputations. The Earle being now returned home, when he heard that a new supply of souldiers was comming out of England, and thirteene hundred besides of old servitors out of the Low-countries, who had served in little Britaine under Sir John Norris, and that the English entended now to possesse themselves of Balashanon and Belik, Castles up∣on the mouth of Logh-Earn, he being privie to himself of his own evill purposes, and carrying a guilty conscience, on a sudden assaileth the fort at Blackwater, by which the entry lay into Tir-Oen his owne country, and had it surrendred up unto him. And at the very same instant in maner, hee (wavering in his minde) with one breath (as it were) by his letters offereth unto the Earle of Kildare, his helpe against the wrongs done by the Deputy, and withall, promiseth the Earle of Ormond, & Sir Henry Wallop Treasurer of the kingdome, 1595. Die 12. Iunii. to continue firme in his allegeance, yea and beseecheth in his letters Sir John Norris appointed Lord Generall, that he might be more mildly dealt with, nor against his will be driven headlong upon the dangerous rockes of dis∣loialty. But these letters unto Norris Bagnall the Marshall intercepted, and (as the Earle complained afterward) suppressed, to his greatest prejudice and hurt. For im∣mediatly he and his confederates were proclaimed traitors, both in Irish and English, and pardon offered to all such as had been seduced by false perswasions to take their parts, & would now relinquish them and submit themselves to the Queen. At which time there were accounted to be with the Rebell in Ulster, about a thousand horse∣men, and 6280. footmen: and in Conaght 2300. who were all at the Earles command, very many of them trained souldiers: as who had been exercised in armes, ever since that Sir John Perot Lord Deputy had appointed to every Lord and Chieftain of Ul∣ster, a certain number to be exercised in their weapons, for to resist the Irish Scots of the Islands: or else had been employed in the warres of the Low-countries, whom he in no provident policie for the future time, had caused to be transported thither. And verily the English forces were equivalent in numbers, which were com∣manded by Sir John Norris : for the Queene had selected him as a man of especiall trust and reputation, to be used martially in such journeyes as the Deputie himselfe in person could not undertake, in consideration that hee had performed divers honourable services was now President of Mounster, and had formerly commanded the Britain companies, which were to serve principally in this action. Yet atchieved he no memorable exploit, by reason of private misconstruction, suspicious surmises, and dislikes conceived betweene him and the Deputy. Onely the time was spent in preying, truce-making, and frivolous parlies. And without doubt the martiall men on both sides were well content to have the war drawne out in length, and the Earle fed himselfe every day with hope of succour out of Spaine. But among all these parlies, that was most memorable, which the two Commis∣sioners, Sir Henry Wallop Treasurer of that Realme, and Sir Robert Gardener chiefe Justice, most grave personages and of approved wisdome, had with the Earle of Tir-Oen and O-Donell: at which they and others of the rebels both laied open their grie∣vances, and exhibited also their petitions. The Earle complained, that Sir Henry Bagnall the Mareschall had cunningly with∣drawne unto himselfe the fruit of his labours; that with lyes and indirect meanes and subtle fetches, he had thrust him out of the Queenes favour, and after a sort brought him into disgrace: that to his great hinderance and prejudice, he had intercepted his letters written unto the Lord Deputy, unto Norris, and others; and still detained and withheld from him his wives portion: and herewith he protested, that he never ne∣gotiated with forrain Princes, before he was proclaimed Traitour. Now he exhibited his petitions in most humble manner, That hee and all his fol∣lowers might be pardoned for their crimes, That they might be restored to their for∣mer estates, That they might exercise freely their own religion (and yet that had been alwaies tolerated) That the Mareschall should pay unto him a thousand pounds of lawfull mony of England for the dowry of his wife now deceased, That no garrison souldiers, Sheriffe, or other officer should be appointed within his county and Earle∣dome, That the company of fifty horsemen which he had led, with the Queenes pay thereunto, might be restored unto him, and that those who had robbed and spoiled his people might be punished accordingly. O-Donell for his part, when he had rehearsed his fathers and ancestours fidelity to the Kings of England, complained neverthelesse, that Captaine Boin was sent from Perot the Lord Deputy, with a band of souldiers into his Province, under a colour of teaching his people civility, who being kindly entertained by his father, and having certain townes assigned unto him, offered all maner of injurious indignity and rigour unto his father, and advanced a certaine bastard to the dignity of O-Donell : Also that the said Deputy by sending a Barke secretly intercepted him, thrust him (inno∣cent man) into prison, and there unjustly kept him in duresse, untill that by the Al∣mighties goodnesse he was delivered: Item that the Deputy Fitz Williams laid up fast in close prison for seven yeeres together Sir Owen O-Toole, the second man next to O-Donell in this tract, notwithstanding he was guiltlesse, and sent for upon promise of his safe conduct: and that he oppressed his neighbours in Fermanaugh with into∣lerable wrongs: neither could himselfe devise any other meanes for his owne safety and security, than to releeve his next neighbours thus vexed and molested. Hee like∣wise made the same request that the Earle did, and moreover demanded certaine fortresses and lands in the county of Slego, which he challenged to be his in∣heritance. Shan Mat Brian Mac Phelim O-Neal laid downe his complaints, That Walter Earle of Essex had wrongfully taken from him the Isle of Magy, and Sir Henry Bagnall the Barony of Maughery-Mourn, both of them his ancient inheri∣tance: That he was himselfe imprisoned, untill that by enforcement he had resigned his right unto Bagnall ; beside other infinite injuries done unto him by the Garrison souldiers of Knoc-Fergus. Hugh Mac-Guir made a great matter of the insolent out∣rages committed by the Garrison souldiers next unto him, in driving away his cattell as booties, and withall that the Sheriffe who was sent into his Territories, had cut off the head of his next kinsman, and spurned it under foot. Brian Mac-Hugh-Oge, Mac Mahon and Ever Mac-Couley came in with these their complaints, That over and above other wrongs Sir William Fitz Williams the Deputy for great gifts and presents, had settled Hugh Roe in the dignity of Mac-Mahon: and soone after, for that with banner displaied after the manner of the country he deman∣ded a mulct or fine which hee had imposed, hanged him up, and granted his inheri∣tance unto strangers, thereby to extinguish the name of Mac-Mahon. In a word, they were petitioners every one severally for the same things that I have above re∣hersed. When some of these their demands were thought reasonable, and others againe to be referred unto the Queenes consideration; the Commissioners also on the other side proposed certaine Articles unto the Rebells, that they should lay downe their armes, disperse their forces, acknowledge submissively their disloyalties, admit Sheriffes in their governments, re-edifie the Forts they had defaced, suffer the garrisons to live without disturbance, make restitution of spoiles taken, confesse upon their oath how farre they have dealt with forrain Princes, and renounce all for∣raine aide, &c. But these seemed so unreasonable to them in their conceit, being now growne in∣solent, that after agreement of a cessation from armes for a short time, they depar∣ted on all hands; whereas the Queene both then and afterwards, as well to spare the effusion of blood, as to save expence of money, was willing enough to condescend unto any conditions of peace, that might have stood with the honour of her Maje∣stie. Lord Generall of the Army. The time of cessation once expired, Norris (unto whom alone by the Queenes commandement, the command of the military forces was conferred in the Deputies absence) marched with his armie against the Earle. Howbeit the Deputie joyned with him, and so with great terrour to the rebels, went forward as farre as Armach: so that the Earle leaving the fort at Blackwater, set fire upon the villages all round about, and the towne of Dungannon ; yea and plucked downe a great part of his owne house there, who bewailing now his owne estate, as quite undone and past all reco∣very, he thought of nothing but how to hide his head: when as they had marched so farre, they stayed there for default of victuals; and having proclaimed the Earle trai∣tour within his owne territorie, and placed a garrison in the Church of Armach, re∣turned backe. In their returne, the Earle diligently attendeth and accosteth them a farre off (yet they strengthened the garrison at Monaghan ) and when they were come neere unto Dundalke, the Deputy, according to the purport of her Majesties Com∣mission, rendred the prosecution of the warre unto Norris, and after many words passed too and fro betweene them, with all the complements of kindnesse and curte∣sie that might be, he retireth to Dublin, and providently looketh to the state of Lein∣ster, Conaght, and Mounster. Norris staied in Ulster, but atchieved no exploit answerable to the expectation rai∣sed of so worthy a Warriour: whether it were upon emulation to the Deputy, or that Fortune altered and went backward (as who in the end is wont to crosse great Com∣manders) or in favour of the Earle, unto whom he was as forward in kind affection, as the Deputy was estranged from him. For Norris seemed to blame the Deputy in some measure, for that entertaining an hard opinion of the Earle, his resolution was to make no peace with him: for he in no wise would be otherwise perswaded, but that hee trifled out the time, and made delaies for the nonce, expecting aide and suc∣cour still out of Spaine: whereas Norris in the meane while more favourable to him, and credulous withall, had conceived very good hope to bring the Earle to conditi∣ons of peace: which hope he working under hand so fed and fomented still in Nor∣ris, as that he also presented unto him a fained submission, subscribed with his owne hand and signed, yea and humbly upon his knees craved pardon. Yet for all this in the meane time he dealt by his spying Agents and Curreours earnestly and secretly with the King of Spaine, what with writing, and what with praying to have aide from him; so farre forth, as that there were secretly sent one or two messengers from the Spaniards to the Rebels, with whom it was agreed, that in case the King of Spaine sent at the prefixed time a competent Armie, able to vanquish the English, they would joine their owne forces, and if in the meane time he furnished them with munition and provision for warre, they would reject all conditions of peace whatsoever. To these covenants, O Rorke, Mac-William, and others set to their hands, but not the Earle himselfe, being providently cautelous, and yet no man doubts but his consent was thereto. And the letters which the King of Spaine wrote backe full of great promises, hee in outward shew of dutifull service, sent unto the Deputy, and withall relying himselfe upon assured hope of helpe from Spaine, star∣ted backe from that written submission aforesaid, and faithfull promise made to Norris: for which, Norris through his owne credulty thus deluded and engaged, taketh him up in hot and bitter termes, as if he had gulled him. But he knowing well enough how to temporize and serve the time, entreth againe into a parlie with Nor∣ris and Fenton the Secretary: and so by giving hostages, a peace such as it was (or ra∣ther covenants of agreement) was concluded: which soone after with the like levi∣tie as before, he brake; alledging for his reason and excuse, that he could not other∣wise thinke, but hee was deceitfully dealt with, because the Deputie and Norris a∣greed so badly; because also the Deputie was discontented with them that in his be∣halfe travelled with him about peace, as though the Deputie desired nothing but warre, considering that the troupes of horsemen were supplied out of England, the King of Spaines letter abovesaid detained, and the Mareschall his most heavie enemie, even then was returned with new commission out of England. Hereupon therefore hee falleth to harrie and waste the countries confining, to burne townes and villages, to rouse and drive away booties: but within a while pricked with some remorse of conscience for such outrages committed, and hearing besides, that there was a peace like to be treated between England and Spaine, hee sued once againe for a parlie, and conditions of peace: it yrkes mee to run through all the cloakes of his dissimulation in particular. But to be short, when he was in any danger of the English, in semblance, countenance, and words from teeth outward he so masked himselfe under the vizard of submission, and pretended such repen∣tance for his former misdemeanors, that he shifted off and dallied with them still, un∣till they had forslipt the opportunitie of pursuing him, and untill of necessity the for∣ces were to be dissolved and withdrawn. Againe, such was the sloathfull negligence of the Captaines in Ireland, the thrifty sparing in England, the inbred lenitie of the Queene, who wished that these flames of rebellion (for warre it was not to be cal∣led) might be quenched without blood, that his faire words and pretences were be∣leeved, yea and hope otherwhiles was offered unto him of pardon, lest his peevish pervicacie should be more and more enkindled. In the yeere 1597. when as by this time all Ulster throughout beyond Dundalke, except seven Castles with wards, Baron Bu∣rough, Lord Deputie, 1597. (namely, Newry, Knoc-Fergus, Carlingford, Greene Castle, Armach, Dondrom, and Olderfleet ) yea and in manner all Conaght, was revol∣ted; Thomas Lord Burrough, a man full of courage and politicke withall, was sent Lord Deputie into Ireland. And about that time Sir Iohn Norris distasting himselfe and the new Deputie, ended his life. At which time the Earle beseeched by his letters a Cessation of armes; and verily it seemed good policie to grant it for a moneth. After the moneth expired, the Deputie brought his forces together, and which was thought to stand with his pro∣fit and honour both, at his first entry into government, aranged them in order of bat∣tell against the Earle: and albeit hee was welcomed by the Earle with a doubtfull and dangerous peece of service within the space of the Moiry, yet made hee way through by his valor, and most valiantly won the Fort at Blackewater, repaired and re-enforced by the Rebels, by which the way lieth into the Countie of Tir-Oen, and which besides woods and marshes, was the onely strength that the Rebels had: and by this first attempt gave good proofe, that if the warre were well prosecuted, they might easily be vanquished. The very same day whereon this Fort was taken, whiles the Deputie together with his armie were giving thankes unto God for this victorie, suddenly an allarum was given, and the enemie shewed himselfe from an hill hard by: against whom, Henrie Earle of Kildare presently marched, with a cor∣net of horse and certaine of the better sort of Gentlemen voluntaries, and setting upon them, put them to flight. Yet were there slaine of the English part, Francis Vagham brother to the Lord Deputies wife, R. Turner Serjeant Major a doughty and approved servitour, two of the Earle of Kildares foster brethren: whose death he tooke so heavily, that himselfe within few daies after for griefe of heart ended his life. For there is no love in the world comparable by many degrees to that of foster∣brethren in Ireland. But many more were wounded, and among the rest Sir Thomas Waler, highly commended for his Martiall forwardnesse. After that this Fort was with new muni∣tions re-enforced, no sooner had the L. Deputy withdrawne his army from thence, but the Rebels waving now betweene hope, feare, and shame, thought it their best and safest course straightly to besiege it: For the Earle supposed it was the most im∣portant place to offend and annoy them, as that both his honour and fortunes were for ever at their down-set if he might not recover it. With a strong power therefore he beleaguered it round about. Against whom the Deputy straightway setteth for∣ward and marched without intermission: but alas, marching on thus in his full pace to victory, hee was arrested by violence of sicknesse, and cut off by untimely death, leaving a great misse of him to the State, and security to the ranging Rebels. Certes, if he had lived longer, by the judgement of wisemen, he had abated their insolencies, and the State had not beene plunged into so great perils. The Rebels understanding of the Deputies death, became exceeding stout and bold, and so eft-soones with mighty out-cries and furious violence assaulted the Fort, but repulsed alwaies they were with the greater losse: they that gave the Scallado were thrown down headlong, and most of them, by the Garrison souldiers sallying resolutely upon them borne downe and troden under foot, in so much as distrusting now to maine force, they changed their copy and determined to protract the siege, being perswaded that they within had victuals but for few daies; and besides, they conceived good hope that the Garrison souldiers for very want would bee wave∣ring in their alleageance and turne traitours. But through the singular valour of Tho∣mas Williams the Captaine, and of the band within, the place was manfully defen∣ded: who having suffered hunger, sharp fights, and all extremities, after they had eaten up their horses, were driven to pluck up the weeds growing among the stones for their food, and endured all the miseries that might be. Now by this time the government was by authority from the Queene commit∣ted unto the Earle of Ormond, under the title of Lievtenant Generall of the Armie, un∣to the Chancellor, and Sir Robert Gardiner. Then Tir-Oen recapitulateth in a long letter unto the said Lievtenant all his greivances afore specified: and not leaving out the least insolencie either of souldiers, or of Sheriffes, coldly excuseth his breach of Covenants with Sir John Norris. But principally he complaines, that Feogh Mac-Hugh, a eere associate and kinsman of his, had been persecuted and executed: and in the end, That his letters unto the Queen were in England intercepted and suppressed: as also, that those impositions and compositions laid both upon the Nobles and Commons were intolerable. He addeth moreover and saith, he saw full well, that all the Territories of the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, would shortly bee parted and shared among the Councellors, Lawyers, Souldiers, and Notaries. And here∣with he closely sendeth succour unto the sonnes of Feogh Mach-Hugh, that they might kindle new coales in Leinster. So that now, every man might see that this war was begun to no other end (whatsoever was pretended) but to extirpate the English quite out of Ireland. 1598. All this while the Earle continued his siege about the Fort at Black-water ; for the raising whereof, the Lievtenant Generall of the Armie (for there was no Deputy as yet substituted) sent the most choice troupes, fourteene Ensignes, under the conduct of Sir Henry Bagnall, the Mareschall, and the bitterest adversary the Earle had: up∣on whom as he marched with divided troupes, the Earle, edged with fretfull malice, assailed most furiously neere unto Armagh, and forthwith (the Mareschall against whom he had bent all his force, being slaine amongst the thickest of his enemies) as he obtained a most joyous triumph over his private adversarie, so he went away with a glorious victory over the English. And verily, since the time that they set first footing in Ireland, they never had a greater overthrow; wherein thirteene valiant Captaines lost their lives, and fifteene hundred of the common souldiers; who being routed and put to shamefull flight, as they were disparkled all over the fields were cut in pieces: and such as remained alive, laid the fault reproachfully, not upon their owne cowardice, but their chiefe leaders unskilfulnesse (a thing now a daies ordinary.) Immediately upon this, followed the yeelding up of the Fort at Black-water: when as the garrison souldiers having held out with loyaltie in heart, and weapon in hand, unto extreme famine, being now dri∣ven to exceeding great distresse, saw all hopelesse of succour and reliefe. A notable victory this was, and of great consequence to the Rebels, who furnished themselves hereby with armour and victuals: and now the Earle renowned all Ireland over, and magnified in every place as the founder of their freedome, above all measure swelled with haughty arrogancy: and sent into Mounster, Ouny-Mac-Rory-Og-O-More, and Tirell (who although by his first originall he were of English blood, yet none so ma∣liciously bent against the English name as hee) with 4000. preying rogues: against whom Sir Thomas Norris, President of that Province, advanced forward with a strong power as far as to Kilmalock: but before hee saw the enemy he dispersed his forces, and retired backe to Corcke. Which when the Rebels understood, having a great rabble of most lewd rascals flocking from all parts unto them, they fell to waste the country, to drive booties be∣fore them, to ransack and burne where ever they went, the castles, houses, and farme places of the English, and most cruelly in all places to kill them: Iames Fitz-Thomas, one of the family of the Earles of Desmond, they set up as Earle of Desmond ; yet so, as he should hold as tenant in fee of the O-Neal, or Earle of Tir-Oen. And thus after a month, when they had kindled this fire, and set all in a flame in Mounster, they retur∣ned backe loaden with rich booties. The Earle by this time in his letters to the King of Spaine faileth not to resound his owne victories with full mouth; and therewith beseecheth him not to give eare and beleeve, if happily hee should heare any Eng∣lishmen report that he desired peace: for why? hee had hardened his heart against all conditions of peace were they never so indifferent, and would most firmely keep his faithfull promise made unto the said King. Yet in this while wrought he meanes of intercession, by letters and messengers eft-soones sent unto the Earle of Ormond, (but all colourably) about a submission, and his demands withall were most unrea∣sonable. In this desperate estate stood Ireland when Queene Elizabeth chose Robert Earle of Essex (then glorious for the winning of Cadis in Spaine) in regard of his approved wisedome, Robert Earle of Essex Lord Lievtenant. fortitude, and fidelity, Lievtenant and Governour generall of Ireland, to repaire the detriments and losses there sustained, 1599. with most large and ample autho∣rity added in his Commission, To make an end of the war ; and that which by impor∣tunity, as it were, hee wrested from her, To remit and pardon all crimes, even of high treason: which alwaies in the Patents of every Lord Deputy were thus in these very words before time restrained ( All treasons and treacheries touching our own person, our heires and successours excepted. ) And verily with good and provident forecast he ob∣tained the authority to pardon crimes of this kinde, considering that Lawyers doe resolve and set downe, That all Rebellions whatsoever touch the Princes person. There was committed to his charge as great an army as he required, roially furni∣shed and provided, and such as Ireland had never seen the like before: that is, sixteene thousand footmen, and thirteene hundred horsemen: which number was made up after twenty thousand compleat. And he had speciall charge given him, without re∣gard of all other Rebells whatsoever, to bend the whole puissance and force of the war upon the Arch-Rebell the Earle of Tir-Oen, as the head of all the rest, and with all speed to presse hard upon him with garrisons planted at Lough-Foile, and Bala-Shanon: a thing that himselfe had alwaies thought most important, and in accusatory tearms charged and challenged the former Deputies for their neglect in that behalfe. Thus he, honourably accompanied with the flower of Noble gallants, and well wishing acclamations of the common people, yet with a strange thunder-clap in a cleare sun-shine day, hee setteth forward from London, toward the end of March: and being sore tossed and rejected with an adverse tempest, at length arrived in Ire∣land. Where having, after the manner, received the sword, presently contrary to his charge and commission, by the advice of some of the Councell of State there (who too much regarded their owne particular) he, neglecting the Arch-rebell, advanced forward with all his power against petty Rebels in Mounster ; and having taken Cahir, a castle of Thomas Butlers Baron of Cahir (into which, being environed about with the river Showr, certaine seditious persons had betaken themselves) and driven away a number of cattell, he made himselfe terrible to all the country farre and wide, and dispersed the Rebels every way into woods and forrests. Yet in this while he recei∣ved no small foile and overthrow by the cowardise of some who served under Sir Henry Harrington, whom he punished very severely by martiall discipline. Neither returned he before the latter end of July, with his souldiers wearied, sickly, and their number more than a man would beleeve, diminished. When upon his returne he understood that the Queene was displeased at this ex∣pedition of his, so costly, and yet damageable, and that she urged still a journey into Ulster against the Earle, and no other; in his missives unto her Majesty he transferred all the fault from himselfe upon the Councell of Ireland, unto whom for their mani∣fold experience in the affaires of Ireland, he could not choose but condescend: pro∣mising and protesting most faithfully, to set forward with all speed into Ulster. Scarce were these letters delivered, when he dispatcheth others after them, wherein he signi∣fieth, that upon necessity he must turne his journey aside into Ophaly, neere to Dub∣lin, against the O-Conors, and the O-Moils, who were there risen and in armes; whom he quickly and fortunately vanquished with light skirmishes. Now returning, and having taken a review of his army, he found it so weakened and impaired, that by his letters subscribed with the hands of the Councellers of Ire∣land, hee craved a new supply of a thousand souldiers for his expedition into Ulster, which he promised to undertake speedily with solemne protestations. Being now fully resolved to turne the whole warre upon Ulster, hee commanded Sir Coniers Clifford Governour of Conaght, to goe with certain bands lightly appoin∣ted toward Bellike, to the end that the Earles forces might bee distracted one way, whiles he himselfe set upon him another way. Clifford forthwith putting himselfe on his journy with a power of 1500. commanded his souldiers out-toiled with travel∣ling so farre, and having but small store of gun-powder, to passe over the mountaines of Curlew. And when they had gotten over the most part of them, the Rebels under the leading of O-Rorke assailed them on the sudden. The English easily at the first caused them to recule, and marched on forward in their journey: but when the ene∣mies perceived once that they were at a default already for gun-powder, they char∣ged them afresh, and for that they were tired with so long a march, and not able to make resistance, put them to flight, slew many of them, and among the rest Clifford himselfe, together with Sir Alexander Ratcliffe of Ordsall. Mean while, that supply which the Lord Lievtenant required was levied in England, and transported: some few daies after, hee gave the Queene to understand by other letters, that hee could for this yeere performe no more, than with a thousand and three hundred footmen, and three hundred horse goe to the frontiers of Ulster. Thither came hee about the thirteenth day of September; before whom the Earle with his forces two daies to∣gether from the hills made a Bravado, and shewed himselfe: and in the end sending Hagan before, he requested the Lievtenant that they might parlie together: which hee refused to doe, answering, that if the Earle would talke with him, he should finde him the next morrow in the head of his troopes. On which day, after a light skir∣mish made, a horseman from out of the Earles troopes with a loud voice delivered as a message, that the Earle was not willing to fight, but to parly with the L. Lievte∣nant: yet in no wise at that instant. The day following as the Lord Leivtenant was marching forward, Hagan meeteth him, who declareth that the Earle humbly desired to have the Queenes mercy and peace, and besought withall, that he might have but audience for a while: which if he would grant, then would he with all reverence and observance expect him at the Foord of the river hard by ( Balla-Clinch they call it.) This Foord is not far from Louth, the head towne of the County, and neere unto the Castle of Gerard Fleming. Thither sent the L. Lievtenant before some of purpose to discover the place; who found the Earle at the said Foord, and he told them, that although the river was risen, yet might a man be easily heard from one side to the o∣ther. Hereupon the Lord Lievtenant having bestowed a troupe of horsemen in the next hill there by came downe alone; the Earle riding his horse into the water up to the belly, in dutifull and reverent sort saluteth the Lievtenant being on the banke side, and so with many words passing to and fro betweene them, without any wit∣nesses by to heare them, they spent almost an houre. Then both of them retire unto their companies: and Con a base sonne of the Earles following hard after the L. Leiv∣tenant, besought him in his fathers name that certaine principall persons of his traine might bee admitted to a conference. The L. Lievtenant assented thereto, so they were not above six. Then forthwith the Earle taking with him his brother Cormoc, Mac Gennys, Mac Guir, Ever Mac Cowley, Henry Ovington and O-Quin, sheweth himselfe at the Foord. Unto them the L. Lievtenant came down, accompanied with the Earle of Southampton, Sir George Bourchier, Sir Warrham St. Leger, Sir Henry Dan∣vers, Sir Edward Wingfeld, 8 September 1599. and Sir William Constable Knights. The Earle saluteth them every one with great courtesie, and after some few words between them passed, thought good that certaine Commissioners should the next day following treat of peace: between whom it was agreed, that there should be a tr ce from that very day for six weeks, and so forward from six weeks to six weeks unto the first of May: yet so, as it might be free for both sides, after fourteen daies warning given aforehand, to begin warre afresh. And if that any Confederate of the Earles would not yeeld his assent hereto, he left him unto the L. Lievtenant to prosecute him at his pleasure. Whiles these things were a doing, those letters of the Lord Lievtenant which I spake of erewhile, were delivered to the Queen by Henrie Cuffe (a man very learned, but as unfortunate.) Which when she had perused through, and understood there∣by, that her Lievtenant, with so great an armie, in so long time, and with the expence of so much money, had effected just nothing, nor would doe ought that yeere; shee being highly offended thereat, writeth backe againe to himselfe, and to the Coun∣cellers of Ireland in these termes: That his proceeding answered neither her directi∣on, nor the worlds expectation; that shee could not but marvell much, why the Lievtenant by prolonging thus from time to time, and by finding meanes still of fur∣ther delay, had lost those excellent opportunities which he had of prosecuting war upon that Arch-rebell: considering that himselfe, whiles he was in England, advi∣sed nothing else, but to prosecute the Earle himselfe, and none but him; yea and in his letters otherwhiles seriously promised to doe the same. She expostulated, where∣fore hee had made those unprofitable journeyes (even against his owne judgement when it was found) into Mounster and Ophaly, whereof he had not certified her, nor given so much as any notice before they were undertaken? which otherwise shee would expressely have countermanded. If his armie were now broken, weake, and much empaired, why undertooke hee not the action upon the enemie whiles it was entire, strong, and complete? If the spring had not been a fit season for to make war in Ulster, wherefore was the summer, wherefore was the autumne neglected? what, was there no time of the yeere meet for that war? Well, shee now foresaw that her Kingdome of England must be impoverished beyond all measure by such expences, her honour blemished among forrain Princes, and the Rebels encouraged by this un∣fortunate successe: yea they that shall pen the Story of this time, will deliver unto posterity, that she for her part was at great charge to hazzard her Kingdome of Ire∣land, and that he had taken great paines, and had left nothing undone, to prepare for many purposes which perished without undertaking, if now at length he tooke not a course for the maine prosecution of the war. In tart termes therefore she admoni∣sheth both him, and the Councellers of the Kingdome, to look more considerately to the good of the State, and not from thence forward to be transported contrary waies by indirect counsell; commanding them withall, to write into what case they had brought the Kingdome of Ireland; and carefully to foresee, that all inconveniences from thenceforth might be diligently prevented. 28. Septemb. 1599. The Lord Lievtenant startled, or rather galled with these letters, speedeth in all hast, and sooner than any man would have thought, into England, accompanied with some men of quality, and well and early in a morning comming upon the Queene at unwares, while she was most private and in her bed chamber, presents himselfe upon his knees unto her; who after she had welcomed him with a short speech (and not with that countenance as heretofore) commanded him to withdraw himselfe unto his owne chamber, and there to keepe. For the Queene was highly offended with him, both because hee, contrary to her commandement, had left his charge so suddenly without her leave, and before he had setled the State; and also had treated with the Rebels to her dishonour privately, and upon equall termes, with condition of tolera∣tion of Religion, and to her diservice, when as the Rebels made profit of all cessati∣ons: and moreover, that hee had agreed upon such a cessation as might every four∣teenth night be broken, whereas it was in his power by the authoritie that he had, to make a finall end with the Rebels, and to pardon their treason and rebellion. What befell him afterwards in England, and how it appeared by pregnant pre∣sumptions, and some evidence, that he aimed at other matters than war against Re∣bels, whiles hee could not finde in his heart to remit private distastes for the publike good, and relied too much upon popularitie (which is alwaies momentany, and never fortunate) it is impertinent to this place, neither take I pleasure so much as to remember the same. The said cessation was scarcely once or twice expired, when the Earle of Tir-Oen drew his forces together, and addresseth himselfe againe to war. Unto whom there was sent from the State Sir William Warren, to know of him wherefore he brake the Cessation that was made? Unto whom in the swelling pride of his heart he haughtily answered, That he had not broken the Cessation, considering he had given fourteene daies warning before, that he ment to renew the warre; and that he had just cause to war a fresh: for why? he understood that the Lord Lievtenant, in whom he had re∣posed all his hope and whole estate, was committed in England: Neither would he have any thing to doe from thence forth with the Councellours of the Kingdome, that had dealt before time so craftily and deceitfully with him. And as for the Cessa∣tion, would he never so faine, he could not revoke it, because he had already entred another course, and appointed O-Donel to goe into Conaught, and other of his con∣federates into other parts. In this meane space, there ran among the Rebells rumours very rife (and the Earle of Tir-Oen questionlesse was the authour) that there should be within a while the greatest and strangest alteration that ever was in England; and lewd persons be∣gan daily to encrease both in number and in courage. For they that were of the Irishry, aspired now to their ancient freedome and Nobility; contrariwise good and honest men of the English blood were much dejected and discouraged, seeing so great expences of the Prince came to nothing: who also complained one unto another, that they had been of late excluded as meere strangers from bearing offices in the com∣mon-Weale. But the Earle, all in a glorious jollity giveth it out every where, and that with open mouth, That he would recover the liberty both of Religion and of his Country; he receiveth in every place busie and tumultuous persons into his protecti∣on, he sends them succour and aide, strengthneth and comforteth the distrustfull, stoutly streineth and setteth-to his helping hand to subvert the English government in Ireland, being drawne on and fed with hope which the King of Spaine, by sen∣ding now and then munition, and some money made shew of, and the Pope by pro∣mises and indulgences maintained, as having sent unto him before the plume of a Phoenix, haply because Pope Urban the third had sent in times past a little Coronet, platted with peacocks feathers, unto Iohn, King Henries the second his sonne, when he was invested Lord of Ireland. And now triumphantly glorying of his victories, to the end that he might make a goodly shew of his greatnesse in every place, and by his personall presence set that fire to burne out light, which in his absence hee had kindled in Mounster ; under a faire and religious pretence of visiting a little peece of wood of Christs Crosse (which is thought to be kept in the Monastery of the Holy Crosse in Tipperary ) in mid-winter thither hee goes on Pilgrimage, and sent out into the grounds of true and faithfull subjects a number of preying robbers, under the conduct of Mac-Guir: he by chance hapned upon Sir Warrham Saint Leger, who runne him through with his lance, and was withall at the same instant himselfe runne through by him. Whose funeralls when the Earle had performed, he hasteneth home sooner than all men looked for, as having heard, that the Earle of Ormond, appointed Generall of the Army, was rai∣sing of a power from all parts, Charles Blunt Lord Deputy. 1600. and that Sir Charles Blunt Baron Mon joy, appointed the Lord Deputy, was comming; unto whom the Queene before time had pur∣posed in her minde this government; but Robert Earle of Essex (who for to plea∣sure military men, and to deserve the better of them, into whose love he studiously insinuated himselfe, sought, though covertly, to compasse the same himselfe) wholly opposed against him, as if he, the said Lord Montjoy, had seene no service, nor beene experienced in the warres, more than in the Netherlands, had no follow∣ers and dependants, nor much aforehand with the world, and overmuch bookish. He arriveth in Ireland in the moneth of February, without any great noise and stirre, accompanied with a small traine, and so entred upon the Government. Now hee found the state of Ireland very distressed, or rather desperately sick, and past all hope of recovery, yea at the point, as it were, to give up the ghost: for every good and honest meaning minde was dismaied to see such a confluence of calamities, without all hope of remedy, or any allevation at all: but the worst sort seeing all to goe well on their side, and prosper still to their desire, rejoiced and applauded one the other; and the Earle himselfe without any resistance had passed through the whole length of the Iland in triumphant manner, even from the utmost part of Ulster, into Mounster. The Rebells moreover, to terrifie the Deputy now at his first comming, strucke up an Al'arme in the very suburbs of Dublin. But he, full of good courage, desired no∣thing more than to set upon the Earle himselfe, who, as hee had intelligence given him, was to returne out of Mounster. Mustering up therefore in all haste such a power as hee could (for the companies of choice souldiers were in Mounster already with the Earle of Ormond ) he hastened to stop the Earles passage in Fereal, and there to give him battell. But the Earle by celerity and quicke speed prevented him, be∣ing privily enformed of the Deputies designes: for certaine there were even of the Queenes Councell there, who alwaies highly favoured and tendered his procee∣dings. The Deputy being returned to Dublin, was wholly busied in mustering of the old souldiers, that should be sent by shipping to Logh-Foile and Bala-shanon neere unto the mouth of Logh-Earn, that by placing garrisons there, they might make sallies upon the Earle both on backe and sides; as also about sending aide unto the garrison souldiers in Lease and Ophaly, a matter by reason of so many enemies round about, of great danger and difficulty. In the beginning of May, the Deputy put himselfe on his march toward Ulster, with this purpose, to divert the Earle another way, whiles Sir Henry Docwra at Logh-foile, and Sir Matthew Morgan at Bala-shanon planted the garrisons: which they with small adoe effected; for Sir Henry Docwra tooke Logh-foile, and Sir Iohn B lle who accompanied him, tooke Don-a-long and Lhiffer castles, suppressing the rebells with divers overthrowes. Whiles the Earle was every day kept occupied by the Deputy with light skirmi∣shes, wherein he evermore had so bad successe, that hee perceived now the fortune of warre was turned, and himselfe driven back into his owne corners. The Lord De∣puty being returned in Mid-June, when as the garrisons aforesaid were placed accor∣dingly, required out of England certaine companies of souldiers and victuals, for to bestow and plant a garrison also in these parts at Armagh, thereby to bring the Re∣bels within a straighter compasse. Meane while hee tooke a journey into Lease, which was the place of refuge and receipt of all the Rebels in Leinster: where he slew Ony-Mac-Rory-Og, the chiefe of the O-Mores family, a bloody bold, and most desperate young man; who of late had made so soule a stirre in Mounster ; him I say he slew, with other most wicked and mischievous Rebells: and after he had layed their fields waste, hee chased them into woods and forrests, so as that in those parts they were scarcely ever after seene. When as now new succours were come out of England, although he wanted both come and money, the Equinoxe was past, and winter weather began already in that climate, yet marched hee forward to the very entrance of Moyery, three miles be∣yond Dondalk. This passage is naturally the most combersome of all others well neere in Ireland, which the Rebells had fortified and blocked up with pallisadoes and fences, with stakes pitched into the ground, with hurdles joyned together, and stones in the midst, and turfes of earth, betwixt the hills, woods, and bogges quite overthwart on both sides, with great skill and greater industry, yea and manned the place with a number of souldiers. Besides these difficulties in his way, the weather also was passing rigorous, by reason of much raine that fell continually for certaine daies together, whereby the rivers swelling high and overflowing their banks, were altogether unpassable. But when the waters were fallen, the English courageously brake through those pallisadoes or senses aforesaid, and having beaten backe their enemies, and over∣come all difficulties, the Lord Deputy placed a garrison eight miles from Armagh (for at Armagh the Rebells had eaten up and consumed all) which in memory of Sir Iohn Norris, under whom he had his first rudiments in the profession of Armes, he commanded to be called Mount-Norris ; over which he made Captaine E. Blany, a stout and valiant Gentleman, who afterwards in this part, like as Sir Henry Docwra in the other, troubled the Rebells sore, and withall kept them forcibly in awe. In his returne (that I may passe over with silence the skuffling skirmishes which happe∣ned every day) the Rebells in the passe neere unto Carlingford, where they had stop∣ped up the way, in a memorable overthrow were discomfited, and put to fearefull flight. Some few daies after, the Lord Deputy, because hee would lose no time, entred in the very middest of winter the Glynnes, that is, the vallies in Leinster, a secure receptacle of Rebells; where having wasted the countrey, he brought Donell Spani∣oh, Phelim Mac-Feogh, and that tumultuous and pernicious Sept of the O Tools unto submission, and tooke hostages of them. Afterward hee went as farre as Fereall ; and drave Tirell, the most approved warriour of all the Rebells, out of his own holds, or as they call it, Fastnesses (a place full of bogges, and beset thicke with bushes) into Ulster. Now by this time by fetching many a compasse was he come victorious in every place, as farre as to the frontier of Ulster: which he entred, and first having slaine the two sonnes of Ever Mac Cowley, he laied the territory of Fernes wast, and sent out Sir Richard Morison to spoile the Fues. In Breany he placed a garrison, by the conduct of Sir Oliver Lambard: and turning downe to Tredagh, hee received into his protection and mercy such of the principall Rebels as submitted themselves; namely, Turlogh Mac-Henry, a great man and Potentate in Fues, Ever Mac Cowly, O-Hanlan, who glorieth in this, that by inheritance hee is Standard-bearer to the Kings of Ulster, and many of the Mac-Mahons, and O-Realies, who delivered up for hostages their dearest friends and kinsfolke. The spring now approaching, before all the forces were assembled and come together, the Lord Deputy marcheth to Moyery, where by cutting down the woods, he made the way passable, and there erected a fort: out of Lecall he expelled the Mac-Genisses, who usurped lands there, and reduced all the Rebels fortresses and holds about Armagh to his obedience: Armagh also he fortified with a garrison. And so farre went he forward, that hee re∣moved the Earle from Black-water (who had very artificially encamped himselfe there) and purposed somewhat lower to set up a sort. About which time many signified unto him by letters for certainty, that which he had heard before bruited by a common rumour still more and more encreased, namely, that the Sparniards were arrived in Mounster. So that now he was of necessity to desist and give over this prosecution in Ulster, and Ireland was to be defended, not so much from inward rebellion, as from forraine enemies. And yet, lest what he had already recovered should be lost againe, after he had strengthened the garrisons, he speedily posteth into Mounster, journeying continually with one or two companies of horse, commanding the Captaines of the footmen to follow hard after. For whiles he was earnestly busied about the warre in Ulster, the Earle, and his as∣siociates the Rebels of Mounsters by their Agents, a certaine Spaniard elect Arch∣bishop of Dublin by the Pope, the Bishop of Clonfort, the Bishop of Killaloe, and Ar∣cher a Jesuite, had obtained at length, with praying, intreating, and earnest beseech∣ing at the King of Spaines hand, that succour should bee sent into Mounster to the Rebels, under the conduct of Don John D' Aquila, upon assured hope conceived, that all Mounster would shortly revolt, and the titular Earle of Desmond, and Florens Mac-Carty joyne great aides unto them. But Sir George Carew the Lord President of Mounster, had providently before intercepted them, and sent them over into England. Thus D' Aquila arrived at Kinsale in Mounster with two thousand Spaniards, old souldiers, and certaine Irish fugitives, the last day of October: and straightwaies ha∣ving published a writing, wherein hee gloriously stileth himselfe with this title, [MASTER Generall and Captaine of the Catholick King in the warre of God, for hold∣ing and keeping the Faith in Ireland ] endevoureth to make the world beleeve, That Queene Elizabeth by the definitive sentences of the Popes was deprived of her kingdomes, and her subjects absolved and freed from their oath of allegeance, and that hee and his men were come to deliver them out of the devils clawes, and the English tyrannie. And verily with this goodly pretence, he drew a number of lewd and wicked persons to band and side with him. The Lord Deputie, having gathered together all the Companies of souldiers that he could, prepareth himselfe to the siege: and Sir Richard Levison the Vice-Admirall, sent out of England with one or two of the Queenes ships to impeach all accesse, fore-closeth the haven. The English, when they had now encamped themselves, began from land and sea to thunder with their ordnance upon the towne, and more straightly to beleaguer it round about: which siege notwith∣standing was by and by not so forcibly urged; for that, on the one side, Levison with the sea souldiers was sent before against two thousand Spaniards newly landed, at Bere-haven, Baltimor, and Castle Haven, of whose ships hee sunke five: on the other side the President of Mounster, at the same time was dispatched with cer∣taine troupes to get the start of O-Donell, who was now approaching, that hee should not joyne with that new supplie of the Spaniards. But hee, when as now all the Country was over frozen, had by speedie journeyes in the night, through blind by-waies, gotten to those Spaniards newly arrived, and was not so much as once seene. Some few daies after, the Earle of Tir-Oen also himselfe came with O-Rork, Rai∣mund Burk, Mac-Mahon, Randall Mac-Surley, Tirell, the Baron of Lixnaw, and the most select and choice of all the Rebels, unto whom when Alphonso O Campo, the leader of the new-come Spaniards, had joyned his forces, they mustered themselves sixe thousand footmen, and five hundred horse strong, in a confident hope of victo∣ry, because they were more in number, fresh and better furnished with all kinde of meanes: whereas contrariwise the English were out-wearied with the inconveni∣ences that follow a winter-siege, excluded from victuals; and their horses besides, with travell and hunger together, altogether unserviceable. In these difficulties and distresses, the Deputie consulteth with the Captaines what was to be done: Some thought the best way was to break up the siege, to re∣tire into Corke, and not to hazzard the whole Realme upon the fortune of one battell. Contrariwise, the Deputy adviseth and perswadeth to persist, and not to degenerate from the approved vertue of their ancestors: adding, that valiant men could not have a more wished opportunity presented unto them, than that which was now fallen into their laps; namely, either to spend their lives with glory, or to vanquish their e∣nemies with honour. He urgeth therefore and plieth the siege with all the power he had, with raising platformes, and continuall battering he plaied upon the towne, and withall, fortifieth his Campe with new trenches. Upon the one and twentieth day of December, the Earle of Tir-Oen sheweth him∣selfe with his horse upon an hill about a mile from the campe: and there encamping himselfe, maketh a bravado likewise the next day in the same place: the night fol∣lowing, both the Spaniards sallied forth of the towne, and the Irish also assayed to steale into the towne, but both were forced to retire. On the three and twentieth day, the English men discharge their greater peeces upon the towne, as if they had not cared for the Earle now so neere at hand, and the very same day were the letters of D' Aquila unto the Earle intercepted: wherein he importuned Tir-Oen, that the Spaniards newly arrived might bee put into the towne, and that they might assaile the campe on both sides. When the Moone was ready to rise over the horizon, the Deputy commanded Sir Henry Poer to leade forth into the field eight ensignes of old souldiers, and to make a stand on the West side of the campe. Sir Henry Greame, who that night had the charge of the horsemen that watched, very earely in the morning advertised the Deputy, that the enemies for certaine would advance for∣ward, for that a great number of their matches were lighted. Hereupon the al'arme was given throughout the campe, and companies placed wheresoever there was any way to the towne. The Lord Deputy himselfe, with the President of Mounster, and Sir Richard Wingfeld Marshall, marched toward the watch, and withall by the advise of Sir Olivar Lambart, chooseth out a plot, wherein he might give battell to the ene∣mies: Thither were brought the Ensignes and Regiments of Sir Henry Folliot, and Sir Olivar Saint Iohn, with sixe hundred sea souldiers under the conduct of Sir Richard Levison. But the Earle of Tir-Oen, who resolved (as afterwards it was knowne) to have brought into Kinsale by darke night the new supplie of Spaniards, and eight hundred Irishmen, when hee saw now the day to breake, and beheld withall the Marshall and Sir Henrie Danvers with the power of horsemen, and Poer with the Companies of old souldiers at the foot of the hill, being disappointed of his hope, stood still, and soone after by his bag-pipers sounded the retreat. No sooner was the Deputy certified of this retreat of his, so confused and disordered, but hee commanded the pursuit, and himselfe advanced before the vantgard, to marke the manner of their retreat, and according to the present occasion to resolve what to doe: but so thicke a mist with a storme beside fell upon the earth, that for a time they could not see before them. Within a while after, the weather cleering up againe, hee observed that they retired hastily for feare in three great battalions, and with the horsemen placed be∣hind at their backes: hee fully determined therefore to charge upon them, ha∣ving sent backe the President of Mounster with three companies of horsemen in∣to the campe, to restraine the Spaniards, if haply out of the towne they should sallie and breake out upon them. And the Lord Deputie himselfe followed after the Rebels, with such speed in their retreat, that hee forced them to stand in the brinke of a bogge, whereunto there was no accesse but at a foord: but when those horsemen that kept the foord were by the valour of the Marshall and the Earle of Clan-Ricard discomfited, and put to rout the other, and courage∣ously gave the onset upon the maine troupes of the enemies horsmen; which charge when Sir William Godolphin, who had the leading of the Deputies horse, Sir Henry Da vers, Minshaw, Taff, Fleming, and Sir John Barkly Sergeant Major of the Camp, who joyned with them, redoubled with so great alacrity, that the Rebels presently brake, and fell in disorder. But it was not thought good to follow the chase, but gathe∣ring their forces and power together, they charged upon the maine battell now in feare and wavering; which they also brake. Tirell with his company and the Spaniards all this while kept their standing, and made their ground good: against whom the Deputy putteth forward his rereward; and that he might accomplish not onely the part of a leader in commanding, but also of a souldier in fighting, with three com∣panies of Oliver S. Iohns, whereof Captaine Roe had the conduct, chargeth violently upon them, and so brake their arraies, that in great disorder and confusion they re∣culed backe and betooke themselves to the Irish, by whom they were presently left unto the edge of the sword, and routed by the troupe of the Duputies horsemen, whereof Sir William Godolphin had the leading. Then Ter-Oen, O-Denel and the rest on all sides put to flight, flung away their weapons, and made what shift they could to save themselves. Alphonso O Campo was taken prisoner with three other Captaines of the Spaniards, and six ensigne bearers; slaine there were one thousand and two hun∣dred, nine ensignes taken, whereof six were Spanish. Of the English part scarce two men lost their lives, many were wounded, and among them Sir Henry Danvers, Sir William Godolphin, and Cr ft: so little cost this so great a victory. The Lord De∣puty after he had founded the retreat, and rendred thankes unto almighty God for this victory among the dead bodies of the enemies lying thicke in heapes, gave the order of Knight-hood to the Earle of Clan-Ricard for his right valiant service in this battell: and thus with lucky acclamations returned victor into his Campe, which he found safe and found from all dangers. For the Spaniards within the towne, seeing all places every way made sure with guardes, and having experience before time, that all sallies were to their losse, kept themselves at home in carefull expectation of the event. A noble victory this was, and in many regards important, whereby Ireland most miserably distressed and ready to revolt, was retained, the Spaniards ejected, the Arch-rebell Tir-Oen repulsed into his starting holes in Ulster, O Donell driven into Spaine, the rest of the rebellious rable scattered into sundry parts, the Princes regall authority by daunting the l wlesse insolency recovered, and within a while after a secure peace throughout the Iland firmely established. The morrow after, the Lord Deputy commanded Captaine Bodley the Trench-master, who both in the fortifications and also in the battell had manfully borne him∣selfe, to finish the Mount begun, and to raise bankes and rampires neerer unto the enemy: about which when there had beene six dayes spent, D' Aquila in his letters sent by his Drum Major to the Deputy, craved that some Gentlem n of credit might be sent into the towne, with whom he might parly. For this purpose was Sir William Godolphin chosen: Unto whom D' Aquila signi∣fieth, that he had found the Lord Deputy, although he were his most eager enemy, yet an honourable person, the Irish of no valour, rude and uncivill, yea and (that which he sore feared) perfidious and false: That he was sent from the King of Spaine his Master, to aide two Earles, and now he doubted whether there were any such in Re∣rum Natura, considering that one tempestuous pusse of warre had blown the one of them into Spaine, the other into the North, so as they were no more to be seene. Willing therefore he was to treat about a peace, that might be good for English, and not hurtfull to Spaniards: albeit he wanted nothing requisite to the holding out of a siege, and expected every day out of Spaine fresh supplies to finde the English worke and trouble enough. To bee briefe, being as they were on both sides distressed, and weary of siege, they grew to this agreement upon the second day of January, That the Spaniards should yeeld up Kinsale, the Forts, and Castle at Baltimore, Be haven, and Castle Haven, unto the Lord Deputy, and so depart with life, with goods, and their Banners displaied; that the Englishmen should allow them shipping, paying the full price therefore, wherein they might at two severall passages faile over into Spaine: Also if they hapned in their returne homeward to arrive at any Port in Eng∣land, that they might be kindly entertained: and in the meane time whiles they re∣mained in Ireland waiting for windes, have all necessaries for sustenance ministred un∣to them, for their ready mony. These things thus concluded, the Spaniards after certaine daies fitted with a good gale of winde set faile from the coast of Ireland with dishonour, as having their companies much impaired, and weake. Meane while the Earle of Tir-Oen in feare∣full flight got him away, making as great journeyes as possibly he could, through un∣known by-waies, and recovered his lurking holes in Ulster, after he had lost most of his men, whom the rivers risen and running violently by reason of Winter flouds had swallowed up. And afterwards hee could not take his rest without care, no not so much as breath without feare; whiles carrying an evill and burthened conscience he dreaded the due reward of his deserts, and distrusted every one; insomuch as hee sought from day to day new blind corners, and the same straightwaies he abandoned, The Deputy to refresh his wearied souldiers, bestoweth them abroad in garrisons, and after he had setled the State in Mounster, returneth to Dublin. And when the winter season was past, hee by a gentle and easie march (thereby to spread a greater terrour all abroad) returneth into Ulster with an army well appointed, that he might with Forts and garrisons planted round about, belay the Rebels on every side, as it were, within net and toile. When he was come as far as to Black-water, hee trans∣ported his army upon floats; and having found a Foord unknowne before, beneath the old Fort, he erected a Fort upon the very banke, which after his owne Christian name he called Charle-mont. At which time the Earle of Tir-Oen being affrighted, set fire on his owne house at Dunganon. Then marcheth the Deputy forward from thence to Dunganon : and after hee had encamped himselfe, so soone as Sir Henry Docwra was come unto him from Logh-foile with his company, he sent out his soul∣diers every way. Then might you have seene the corn-fields spoiled, the villages on every side and houses, so many as they could descry, set on fire and burned, and boo∣ties out of all parts harried. The Forts in Logh-Crew, Logh-Reogh, and Mogher Le∣cowe (where Sir Iohn Barkley, a most valiant martiall man was shot through with a bullet) were yeelded up, hee planted a garrison at Logh-Eaugh, or Logh-Sidney, which after the title of his owne honour he named Mont-joy, and gave unto Sir Ar∣thur Chichester (who by the demerit of his vertue is now Lord Deputy of Ireland) the charge and command thereof; another likewise at Monaghan, which hee com∣mitted unto Sir Christopher St. Laurence: who being leaders of great experience, and greater courage, what with often sallies, and what with traverse journies made too and fro, so coursed and crossed the rebels, that they seeing themselves environed with garrisons planted round about them, and every day hemmed in and penned in more streightly, that now like wilde beasts of a rascall kinde they must seeke holes and lurk among the thickets, in forrests and woods; most of them changed their copie, and as their fortune, so their fidelity altered, and every one of them began secretly to sub∣mit themselves to the Deputy, striving a vie who should be first; muttering and com∣plaining closely of Tir-Oen, that he had engaged the ruine of the whole nation for his own private discontentments; that this war was only necessary to him, but most per∣nicious to them: neither was the Earle ignorant that both the force and fidelity also of his people and followers was now sore shaken: he determined therefore to prevent the worst, as being weary of misery and calamity, and yet in some hope also of life, which sometimes overmatch the stoutest. By most submissive letters therefore sent now and then to the Queen, wherein with earnest praiers and teares he besought par∣don for his fault, casting himselfe downe in humble and lowly wise; and she obser∣ved in him such tokens of true repentance, that (as she was a most milde and mercifull Prince) shee gave authority unto the L. Deputy to take him to mercy and favour, in case he earnestly craved it. And crave it he did (when hee had heard so much from these that affected and loved him) continually by the most earnest mediation of Arth Mac Baron his brother, and others: and being often rejected, at length in the moneth of February, after he had promised absolutely, and without any condition, to submit his life and all that he had unto the Queene, the Deputy, who had some intelligence out of the Court in England from his inward friends, that the Queene, now farre stept in yeeres, was dangerously sicke, condescended that the Earle might repaire unto Mellifont: and thither forthwith came he out of his lurking holes in all speed, accompanied with one or two, and no more. Being admitted into the chamber of presence (where the L. Deputy with a number of martiall men about him was set in a chaire of estate, in the very entry of the place) he in poore and foule array, with a de∣jected countenance, bewraying his forlorne estate, falleth downe upon his knees, and when hee had so kneeled a while, the Lord Deputy signified unto him that hee should approach neerer: whereupon he rose up, and after he had stepped in lowly ma∣ner some few paces forward, he kneeled downe againe, and cast himselfe prostrate like a most humble suppliant. He acknowledgeth his sinne to God, and fault unto his most gracious Prince and soveraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, in whose royall clemency and mercy lay the onely hope that he had now remaining, to whose pleasure he submitteth whol∣ly and absolutely his life and whole estate. He most demisely beseecheth, that whose boun∣tifull favour in times past, and mighty power now of late he had felt and found, he might now have experience of her mercifull lenity, and that he might be for ever the example of her Princely clemency. For neither was his age as yet so unserviceable, nor his body so much disabled, ne yet his courage so daunted, but that by his valiant and faithfull service in her behalf, he could expiate and make satisfaction for this most disloiall rebellion. And yet, to extenuate his crime, he began to say, that through the malicious envy of some, he had bin very hardly and unreasonably deali with. As he was enforcing this point further, the Deputy interrupted him, and cut off his speech; and after a few words, delivered with great authority (which in a martiall man doth stand in stead of eloquence) to this ef∣fect, that there was no excuse to be made for so grievous and hainous a crime, with few other words, he commanded him to withdraw himselfe: and the next day car∣ried him away with him toward Dublin, purposing to bring him from thence into England before Queene Elisabeth, that shee might determine at her pleasure what to doe with him. But in this meane time, that most excellent Princesse, a little after that she had intelligence (that nothing might be wanting to the accomplishment of her glory) how this rebellion was extinguished, which had not a little disquieted her, departed godly and peaceably out of this transitory life into the eternall. Thus the warre of Ireland, or the rebellion rather of the Earle of Tir-Oen, begun upon private grudges and quarrels intermedled with ambition, cherished at first by contempt, and sparing of charges out of England, spred over all Ireland (under the colourable pretence of restoring libertie and Romish Religion) continued by un∣toward emulation of the English, and covetousnesse of the old souldiers, protracted by the subtill wiles and fanied submissions of the Earle, by the most cumbrous and disadvantageous difficulty of the countrey, and by a desperate kinde of people, sa∣ving themselves more by good footmanship than their valour, confirmed through the light credulity of some, and the secret favour of others that were in place of autho∣rity, heartned with one or two fortunate encounters, fed and somented with Spanish money and Spanish supplies, in the eighth yeere after it first brake out, under the happy direction of Queen Elisabeth of sacred memorie, and the fortunate conduct of the Lord Deputy Sir Charles Blunt Baron of Mont-joy (whom afterwards in regard hereof King Iames created Earle of Devonshire ) was most happily dispatched, and firme peace, as we hope, for ever established. THE MANERS OF THE IRISHRY, BOTH OF OLD AND OF LATER TIMES. The manners of the Irishry, or wild Irish. T He place requireth now, that I should adde somewhat of the man∣ners of this people: and that verily will I doe, as touching their ancient behaviour, out of ancient Historiographers: and concer∣ning the latter, out of a moderne writer both learned and diligent, who hath set downe these matters most exactly. As concerning the Irish of ancient times, when as they were, as all other nations beside in this tract, barbarous and savage, thus much have old authors recorded. Strabo in his fourth booke of Ireland, saith, I can deliver nothing for certaine, but that the inhabitants thereof are more rude than the Britans, as who both feed upon mans flesh, , but in the Epitome , that is, feeding up∣on herbes and weeds. and also devoure exceeding muth meat; yea and they thinke it a point of honesty to eat the bodies of their dead parents, and wantonly to have company not onely with other mens wives, but even with their owne mothers and sisters. Which things verily we relate so, as having no witnesses hereof that be of sufficient credit. Certes the report goes, that the manner of the Scythians is to eat mans flesh; and it is recorded of the Gaules, Spa∣niards, and many more besides, that by occasion of urgent necessity and extremities of siege, that they have done the same. Pomponius Mela in his third book writeth thus: The inhabitants are uncivill, igno∣rant of all vertues, and utterly voide of religion. Solinus in the 24. chapter, When they have atchieved any victory, the blood of those that are slaine they first drinke, and then besmeare their faces with it. Right and wrong is all one with them. A woman lying in childbed, if she have at any time brought forth a man childe, laieth the first meat she gives it upon her husbands sword, and with the very point thereof putteth it softly into the infants mouth, in hansell as it were of the nourishment it shall have hereafter; and with certaine heathenish vowes wisheth, That it may dye no otherwise than in warre and by the sword. They that endevour to be more handsome and civill than the rest, make their sword handles gay with the teeth of great Whales, and such sea monsters, for they be as white as Ivory. And why? the men take a principall pride and glory in the keeping of their weapons faire and bright. But these fashions savour of greater antiquity. Their conditions of the middle time Giraldus Cambrensis hath here and there treated of, and out of him others. But now for their later demeanour, take them here with you out of that foresaid Moderne writer, a studious and painefull man, and that in his owne words: who, as I collect, was named I. Good, brought up in Oxford, by profession and calling a Priest, and who about the yeere of our Lord 1566. taught the Schoole at Limiricke. But first I will briefely premise, according to my promise made even now, somewhat as touching the manner of the jurisdiction that is used among the meere Irish, out of others. O prefixed to the names of the Noblest men in Ireland, by way of ex∣cellency. Their great men and Potentates, whose names have the fourth vowell ( O ) put be∣fore them, as a mark of preheminence & excellency, as O-Neal, O-Rork, O-Donel, &c. and many of the rest, to whose name ( Mac ) is prefixed, have peculiar rights and privi∣ledges of their owne, whereby they domineere and Lord it most proudly, and what with tributes, exactions, paiments, and impositions upon their subjects, for their soul∣diers, Galloglasses, Kernes, and horsemen, whom they are to finde and maintaine, they so prey upon their goods and estates, and oppresse them at their owne pleasure, that the condition of all those which live under them is most miserable: and so often as there be any civill wars risen among them, they sucke out of them their very mar∣row and heart blood. These Nobles or Potentates aforesaid have their Lawyers belonging unto them, whom they terme Brehons, Brehons. like as the Gothes named theirs Bellagines: who be∣ing a sort of most unlearned men, upon certaine set daies, on the top of some excee∣ding high hill, sit to minister justice unto the neighbour inhabitants, betweene such as are at variance and goe to law. Before which Judges, the Plaintiffes with a pitifull voice make moane, and complaine of the wrongs offered unto them: the defendants stand firmely upon their deniall. If any bee convict evidently of theft, they give sen∣tence either to make restitution of the same, or recompence by a fine imposed upon them. These Potentates also have their Historians about them, who write downe their acts and deeds; they have their Physitians also, and Rimers, whom they call Bards ; yea and their Harpers, who have every one of them their severall livelods and lands set out for them: Profession hereditary. and of these, there be in each territorie, severall professours and those liable to some certaine and severall families: that is to say, the Brehons bee of one stocke and name, the Historians of another, and so of the rest, who instruct their owne children or kinsmen every one in their owne art, and have some of them alwaies to be their successors. Now, among these great Lords and Nobles, there is no hereditarie right of succession observed, but whosoever of any principall house is of greater puissance in regard of strength, retinewes of followers, and boldnesse, he by a certaine faction or election of the people in that province, usurpeth the Lord∣ship and soveraigntie over the rest, quite excluding the sonnes, nephewes, and next in blood of the party deceased: and so with certaine complements of barbarous cere∣monies is enthronized in the open aire, upon a little hill for that purpose appointed, upon a Stone for a chaire of estate. At which time also, by a certaine law called Tanistry, Tanistry. there is sometime nominated and declared a successour, who is termed Tanist, I wote not whether by a word borrowed from the Danes, among whom, as among the Northren inhabitants of Britaine, Thane was a long time used for a noble man, and the Kings especiall officer. But whereas I have incidently hapned of better observations concerning this Brehon law and Tanistry, diligently collected by Sir Iohn Davis, his Majesties At∣turney generall in Ireland, I hope I may, with his good leave, impart some of them to publicke knowledge in his owne words. The severall countries or territories possessed by the Irishrie were in number 60. and upwards, and some being greater and some lesse, did in extent and scope of land contain two parts of the Kingdome at least: in every one of these countries there was a chiefe Lord or Captaine, and under him a Tanist, which was his successor apparent: both these were elected of the country, who commonly made choice of such as were most active, and had most swordmen and followers depending upon him. The chiefe Lord had certaine lands in Demesne, which were called his Loghtii, or mensall lands in Demesne, where he placed his principall officers, namely, his Brehon, his Marshall, his Cupbearer, his Physitian, his Surgeon, his Chronicler, his Rimer, and others: which offices and professions were hereditarie and peculiar to certaine septs and fa∣milies. Hee had also small rents of money, and Cowes, and customarie duties of Oate∣meale, Butter, and the like, out of the lands in the Countrie, except the lands of the Church, and such of his kinsmen and followers to whom he granted a speciall dis∣charge or freedome. Besides he had a generall tallage or cutting high or low, at his pleasure upon all the inheritance, which hee tooke commonly when he made warre either with his neighbours, or against the Crowne of England, or made a journey to the State, or gave any entertainment; so as the whole profits of the countrie were at his disposition when hee listed: and so made the inhabitants like the vil∣laines of England, upon whom their Lords had power Tallier Haut and Bas, as the phrase of our law is, whereupon the English call this kind of exaction by the name of cutting. This chiefe Lord had his Cosharies upon his tenants, that is, he and his would lie upon them untill they had eate up all their provisions; he would likewise imploy upon them his horsemen, his kernes, his horse boyes, his dogges boyes, and the like, to be fed and maintained by them, which kept the poore people in continuall slave∣rie and beggerie. The Tanist had also a speciall portion of land, and certaine Chiefrie proper to the Tanist, and within the limits of his portion he had also his cuttings and his Coshiries: the rest of the land being distributed among severall septs, every sept had a Chiefe or Canfinie, as they called him, with a Tanist of that sept, both which were chosen by the chiefe Lord or Captaine of the countrie, and had likewise their severall portions and Chiefries. These Captainships or Chiefries were not partable, but were entire∣ly enjoyed by such as were elected thereunto. All the rest of the lands, except the portions of the Cheifes and Tanists, descended in course of Gavelkind, and were partable among the Males onely; in which division the Bastards had their portions as well as the Legitimate. For offences and matters criminall, none was so hainous or of so high a nature as that it was capitall, for treason against the chiefe Lord, and murder were fineable, the fine they called an Ericke, which was assessed by the Lord and his Brehons. In case of treason the Lord had all the fine, in case of murder the Lord had one moitie, and the kindred of the partie slaine the other moitie: so as they never for∣feited their possessions or their lands for any offence. Howbeit their lands were sei∣sed by the Lord for their fines, untill the same were levied thereupon, and then resto∣red. Rape was finable in like sort, but theft deserved praise and reward, if the stealth were brought into the countrie; because the Lord had a share, and the countrie there∣by became the richer. But the theft committed in the countrie and carried out, if the thiefe were appre∣hended before his friend made offer of his fine, hee was commonly punished with death. But the Lord in that case might take an Erick if he would. Upon the stealth of any cattell, if the owner followed the tract (wherein the Irish are incredible cunning, insomuch as they will find the same by the bruising of a grasse in the summer time) if the party unto whose land the tract is brought cannot make it off to some other land, he is to answer the stealth to the owner. And this be∣ing an Irish law or custome, is at this day observed both by the English and Irish, the same being ratified by an act of Counsell in the Earle of Sussex his government, as fit and necessarie for that Kingdome. The Brehons, assisted by certaine Scholars, who had learned many rules of the ci∣vill and Canon law, rather by tradition then by reading, gave judgement in all cau∣ses, and had the eleventh part of the thing adjudged for their fee, and the chiefe Lords Marshall did execution. These are the principall rules and grounds of the Brehon law, which the makers of the Statutes of Kilkenny did not without cause call a lewd custome; for it was the cause of much lewdnesse and barbarisme. It gave countenance and encourage∣ment to theft, rape, and murther, it made all possessions uncertaine, whereby it came to passe that there was no building of houses, and townes, nor education of children in learning or civility, no exercise of trades, or handicrafts, no improvement or ma∣nuring of lands, no industry or vertue in use among them, but the people were bred in loosenesse and idlenesse, which hath beene the true cause of all the mischeifes and miseries in that Kingdome. "Now forward, take with you the observations of the said Good: and thus much will I speake before hand for the man, that in nothing he shooteth at reproach, but aimeth all at truth, and speaketh onely of those uncivill and meere Irish, that lie shrowded in the utmost coasts, and have not as yet suited themselves with civill qualities and conditions. And to speake in generall of them all, this Nation is strong of bodie, and pas∣sing nimble, stout and haughty in heart, for wit quicke, martiall, prodigall, and care∣lesse of their lives, enduring travell, cold and hunger, given to fleshly lust, kind and curteous to strangers, constant in love, in enmitie implacable, light of beliefe, gree∣die of glorie, impatient of abuse and injurie, and as hee said in old time, in all affecti∣ons most vehement and passionate: Girald. Cam∣bren. If they be bad, you shall no where meet with worse: if they be good, you can hardly find better. Generally, they give unto their children when they come to holy baptisme profane names, adding alwaies somewhat to the name, taken either from some event, or an old wife, or else some colour, as red, white, blacke: or else from a disease, scab, and peeldnesse, or from one vice or other, as theefe, proud, &c. and albeit they be of all men most impatient of reproach, yet these noble men of theirs, even they that have the letter [O] prefixed to their names, disdaine not those additions. The name of the Parent, or any of the same kinred then living, it is not lawfull to give unto children: for they are perswaded that their death is hastened thereby. But when the father is dead, then the sonne assumeth his name, left the name should be lost: and if any Ancestour of that name were a redoubted warriour, the like prowesse and valour is expected from him. This opinion is encreased by their Poets, Bardes, or Rimers, who keepe the exploits of those ancient Progenitours recorded in writing, which they peece out with many high praises and fables devised of their owne braine; whereby these Rimers or Bards grow rich. For new wedded brides, and women in childbed thinke themselves discredited, if they bestow not upon one of these Praise-praters, the best garments they have. Mothers, after six daies that they be brought a bed, companie with their husbands afresh, and put forth their young babes to nource. They that be of the more noble parentage shall have a number of nources repaire unto them streight waies from far, which make suit for the nourcing of the infant; and of these foster children they make more account than of their own which they beare. And although they are most intemperate, by reason of the distemperature of the aire, and the moisture both of the ground, and of their meates; in regard also that all law is exiled; and albeit they thinke it is a shame for themselves to give their owne children the breast, yet for this their nurcelings sake, both man and wife abstaine from carnall company together. And if they doe otherwise, they entertaine another nource under them at their owne charges. And nources there be among them as many well neere as there are young wenches for their ser∣vants: and to have the suckling of the little child, they count a sufficient reward for being naught of their bodies. Now if this infant fortune to bee sicke, they all to besprinckle it with the stalest urine they can get; and for a preservative against all misfortunes, they hang about the childrens neckes, not onely the beginning of Saint Iohns Gospell, but also a crooked naile taken out of an horses shooe, or else a piece of a Wolves skin. And for that purpose, as well nources as infants, weare girdles platted of womens haire. To their lovers also, it is knowne, they send bracelets finely wrought of these haires: whether their minde is herein of Venus girdle called Cestos, I wote not: The Foster-fathers take much more paines, bestow more goods by farre, and shew greater love unto their foster children than they doe to their owne children: From them, these children not so much by due claime of right receive, as by force wrest, even with taking stresses, and driving away booties, appa∣rell, maintenance for their pleasures, mony wherwith to buy them armour, yea and to spend in all kind of their lewdnesse; their dowries also and stockes of cattell. All those that have been nourced by the same woman, love one another more deerely, repose greater trust in them, than if they were their naturall whole brethren and sisters; insomuch as in compari∣son of these and for their sakes, they even hate their naturall brethren and sisters. Be they reproved at any time by their own parents, they flie to these their foster-fathers, and being heartened by them, breake out oftentimes even unto open war against their said parents; taking instructions from them to all lewd and villanous prankes, they become most ungracious and desperate. Semblably, the nources traine up those maidens which they reare, to all obscenity and filthinesse. If any of these foster children chance to fall sicke, a man would not beleeve how quickly their nources heare of it, yea though they dwell many a mile off, how pensively they attend and watch by the sicke body night and day. To conclude, the greatest corruptions of Ireland, are thought to spring from these foster-fathers and nources, and from nought else. That these Irish people are both of an hotter and moisture nature than other nations, we may well conjecture. And this we gather by their wonderfull soft skin: which doubtlesse commeth as well by the nature of the soile, as by certaine artificiall bathings and exercise that they use. By reason also of the same tendernesse of their muscles, they so excell in nim∣blenesse and flexibility of all parts of the body, as it is incredible. Given they are to idlenes above all things: they reckon it the greatest riches to take no paine, and count it the most pleasure to enjoy liberty. Delighted they are above measure in musick, but especially in the harpe with wire-strings, which they warble upon with their nimble fingers most melodi∣ously. Doe any of them betake themselves to religion, a wonder it is to see how they morti∣fie and keepe their bodies under, with a devout kind of austerity, watching, praying, and making themselves leane with much fasting: so that it is no marvell which is written of their monkes in the age afore going. Yea the very women and young maidens fast duely upon every Wednesday and Saturday throughout the whole yeere. Some of them also fast upon Saint Katharines festivall day: and this they faile not to doe upon Christmas day, if it so fall out, even when they be most grievously sicke. Some make this to bee the cause for maidens, that they may be sped with good husbands; for wives, that they may change for a better marriage, either by the death of their husbands, or by forsaking them, or at leastwise by alteration of their conditions. But they that have once given themselves over to lewd∣nesse, are more lewd than lewdnesse it selfe. Their garments they die with the barkes of trees, that English men name Alders: they use also Elder-berries to colour their wooll yellow. With the boughes, barke and leaves of the poplar tree bruised and stamped, they staine their large wide shirts with a saffran colour, which now are almost out of use, and adding thereunto the rine of the wild Arbut tree, salt, together with saffran. And whatso∣ever they die, they doe not so much boile it long over the fire, as drench and steepe the same for certaine daies together among other things in cold urine of man or woman, that the yellow colour may be more durable. They account it no shame or infamie to commit robberies, which they practise every where with exceeding cruelty. When they goe to rob, they poure out their prayers to God, That they may meet with a booty: and they suppose, that a cheat or booty is sent unto them from God as his gift: neither are they perswaded, that either violence, or rapine, or manslaughter displeaseth God: for in no wise would he presens unto them this opportuni∣tie, if it were a sinne; nay a sin it were if they did not lay hold upon the said opportunitie. You shall heare these Cut-throats and Incendiaries come out with these words, God is mercifull, and will not suffer the price of his blood to be of no eff ct in me. More∣over, they say, that they walke in their fathers steps; that this maner of life was left unto them: also, that it were a disparagement of their nobility, if they would get their living by handie labour, and forbeare committing such facts. As they are setting forth to a boot∣haling, or to doe any other businesse, they marke whom they meet first in the morning: if they speed well, they lay for to meet with him oft: if otherwise, they heedfully avoid him. To sleepe and snore in a most stormie night, and not to dispatch a very long way by night on foot, nor to adventure upon any danger whatsoever in spoiling and robbing, they take to be tokens of a base and abject minde. Of late daies, they spare neither Churches nor hallowed places, but thence also they fill their hands with spoile: yea and sometimes they set them on fire, and kill the men that there lie hidden: And the cause hereof, is the most filthy life of their Priests, who of Churches make profane houses, and keepe harlots, who follow them whithersoever they goe; but when they are cast off, seeke cunning devises to doe mischiefe by poisons. The Priests Lemans and their bastards abide within the circuit of a Church, drinke untill they be drunke, lie together, shed blood, and keepe up their cattell there. Among those wild Irish, there is neither divine service, nor any forme of Chappell but outwardly no Altars at all, or else they be filthily polluted: the image of the Rood or Crosse defaced, if there be any at all. The sacred vestiments are so foule and nasty that they would make one to cast up his stomacke: The alter portable, without any crosses emprinted upon it, and by some abuse or other polluted: The Missal or Masse booke all torne, and bereft of the Canon: yet the same is tendred to all oathes and perjuries; the Chalice of lead, with∣out a cover to it, the samll vessels for wine made of a horne. The Priests mind nothing but gathering of goods and getting of children. The Parsons play the Vicars, and that of many Parishes together: they make it great shew of the Canon-Law, but have never a jot of learning. They have their children to succeed them in their Churches, for whose illegitimation they are dispenced with. These will not take the order of Priest-hood, but commit the charge to the Curates without any stipend, that they may live by the booke, that is, upon some small gift or oblation at the baptisme, inunction, and buriall, wherewith God wot, they live most bare and miserable. These Priests sonnes that follow not their studies, prove for the most part notorious theeves. For they that carry the name of Mac-Decan, Mac-Pherson, Mac-O pac, that is, the Deanes or Deacons son, the Parsons son, and the Bishops sonne, are the strong∣est theeves that be, and the more able by their Parents liberality to raise a power of unru∣ly rebels; and the rather, because following their fathers steps, they maintaine hospitality. As for the daughters of these Priests, if their fathers be living, they are set forth with good portions, in case they wed: but if their fathers be dead, either they begge or prostitute their bodies. At every third word tis ordinary with them to lash out an oath, namely, by the Trinity, by God, by S. Patrick, by S. Brigid, by their Baptism, by Faith, by the Church, by my God-fathers hand, and by thy hand. And albeit by these they sweare, with the sacred Bi∣ble or Missal laid most religiously upon their bare heads, yea and be forsworne, yet if one say they stand in danger of damnation for perjury, you shall heare them straightwaies cry aloud, The Lord is mercifull, and will not suffer the price of his blood shed for me, to be of no effect in me. Never shall I goe to hell, repent I or repent I not. But for the performance of promise, and that a man may beleeve them, these three points with them be of greatest weight to bind them. First, if one sweare at the altar, touching the booke lying open, and the same laid on the crown of his head. Secondly, if he take to record some Saint, whose crooked staffe or bell he toucheth and kisseth. Thirdly, if he sweare by the hand of an Earle, or of his owne Lord, or some mighty person: for then, if he be convict of perjury by the two former, he incurreth infamy; but in case hee be forsworne by the third, the said mighty man will wring from him perforce a great summe of mony, and a number of Cowes; as if by that perjury the greatest abuse and injury that might be were offered unto his name. For cowes are their only wealth, and of greatest esteeme. Touching which cattell, this seemeth not unworthy the observation. Most certain it is (as hee writeth) that cowes in Ireland give no milke, unlesse their own calfe be set by their side alive, or else the skin of the dead calfe staffed with straw, so as it may carry the resemblance of a live one, for in that skin they acknowledge the sent, as it were, of their owne wombe. If a cow goe dry or hold up their milke, they send for a witch, who by herbes may cause her to cast her love upon another cowes calfe, that so she may give downe her milke. Town-dwellers seldome make any contract of marriage with them of the country, and these passe their promise not for present, but for the future time: or else give assent without any deliberation. Whence it is, that for every light falling out they part asunder, the hus∣band to another woman, the wife to another husband; neither is it ever knowne for cer∣tainty whether their contracts have been true or false, before they give up their last gaspe. Hence rise contentions about the possession of lands, hence grow robberies, depredations, manslaughters, and deadly hatred. The women that are cast off goe to witches for counsell, who are thought verily to bring upon the former husband, or his new married wife, either barrennesse or impotency in the act of generation, or else most dangerous diseases. For all of them are marvellously prone to incest, and nothing is there so common as divorces un∣der pretence of conscience. The women as well as the men make great account of the haire or glibbes of their heads, especially if they be of a golden colour, and long withall: for they shew and lay them out platted to the full length in a bravery, and suffer them when they are finely and trimly curled to hang downe: when in the meane time they wrap in foldes and rolls about their head many ells of the finest linnen or sendall. This kinde of coronet or head-tire they all weare that are able to get it, after their child-birth, whether it bee in wedlo ke, or by playing the whores. To these may be added a number of superstitions. I cannot tell whether the wilder sort of the Irishry yeeld divine honour unto the Moone; for when they see her first after the change, commonly they bow the knee, and say over the Lords prayer, and so soone as they have made an end, they speake unto the Moone with a loud voice in this manner: Leave us as whole and sound as thou hast found us. They take unto them Wolves to be their God∣sibs, whom they tearme Chari Christ, praying for them and wishing them well, and so they are not afraid to be hurt by them. The shoulder blade bone of a sheep, when the flesh is cleane taken from it, they use to looke through, and thereby foretell of some c rse shortly to be carried out of that house, if they spie any darke or duskish spot in it. They take her for a wicked woman and a witch, what ever she be, that commeth to fetch fire from them on May day (neither will they give any fire then, but unto a sicke body, and that with a curse): for because they thinke the same woman will the next Summer steale away all their butter. If they finde an hare amongst their heards of cattell on the said May day, they kill her, for they suppose shee is some old trot that would filch away their butter. They are of opinion, that their butter if it be stollen will soone after bee restored againe, in case they take away some of the thatch that hangeth over the doore of the house, and cast it into the fire. And upon these Calends, or first day of May, they fully beleeve that to set a greene bough of a tree before their houses, will cause them to have great abundance of milke all summer long. In their townes, when any Magistrate entreth first upon his office, the Wives along the streets, and the Maidens out of windowes, bestrew them and their followers with wheat and salt. And before they sow their seed in the corne field, the Goodwife or Mistresse of the house sendeth salt to the said field. That the Kites may not swoupe away their chickens, they hang up in some place of the house-roofe the egge-shels out of which the said chic∣kens were hatched. To rubbe their horse heeles, or to curry their bodies with a curry-combe, or to gather grasse to meat them with, it is not lawfull upon a Satur∣day; whereas they will not sticke to doe all this upon other dayes, be they never so high and festivall. If they never give fire out of the house unto their neighbours, they are perswaded their horses shall live the longer, and continue sound. If the owners of horses eat egges, they must looke unto it that they be even in number, o∣therwise their horses will be in danger. Horse-breakers and horse-keepers are forbidden to eat egges. A custome there is also among them, that horsemen after they have eaten egges doe wash their hands. When an horse is dead, they hang up his feet and legges in the house, yea their very hoofes are esteemed as an hallowed and sacred relique. In no case must you praise an horse or any other beast, untill you say, God save him, or unlesse you spit upon him. If any harme befall the horse within three dayes after, they seeke him out that praised him, that he may mumble the Lords Prayer in his right eare. They thinke there bee some that bewitch their horses with looking upon them: and then they use the helpe of some old hagges, who saying a few Prayers with a loud voice, make them well againe. There is a certaine small worme breeding in their horses feet, which creeping on still by little and little, breedeth a great many of the same kinde, and cor∣rupteth the body: Against this worme they send for a wise woman, who is brought to the horse on two severall Mondaies, and one Thursday. She breatheth upon the place where the worme lieth; and after shee hath rehearsed a charme, the horse recovereth. This charme they teach many for a piece of money, making them to sweare that they will not reveale it to any body. Against all maladies and mischiefes whatsoever, the women have effectuall enchant∣ments or charmes, as they suppose, divided and parted amongst them, each one her severall enchantment, and the same of divers forces; unto whom every man, according as his mis∣chance requireth, speedeth himselfe for helpe. They say alwaies both before and after their charmes, a Pater Noster and an Ave Maria. When any man hath caught a fall upon the ground, forthwith hee starteth up againe on his feet, and turneth himselfe round three times toward his right hand, with his sword, skeine, or knife hee diggeth into the earth, and fetcheth up a turfe, for that, they say, the earth doth yeeld a spirit: and if within some two or three daies he fell sick, there is sent a woman skilfull in that kind unto the said place, and there she saith on this wise. I call thee P. from the East and West, South and North, from the forrests, woods, rivers, meeres, the wilde wood-fayries, white, red, black, &c. and with∣all, bolteth out certaine short praiers: then returneth she home unto the sicke party, to try whether it be the disease called Esane, which they are of opinion is sent by the Fairies: and whistereth a certaine odde praier with a Pater Noster into his eare, putteth some coals into a pot full of fair water, and so giveth more certain judgment of the disease, than ma∣ny of our Physicians can. Their warre-fare consisteth of horsemen, of souldiours set in the rere-guard, whom they terme Galloglasses, Galloglasses. Kernes. who fight with most keen hatchets, and of light armed footmen called Kernes, whose service is with darts and skeanes. To give an acclamation and shout unto every footman or horseman as he goeth out of the gate, is counted lucky and fortunate: he who hath no such applause is thought to have some mischeife portended unto him. In war they use the bagpipe in stead of a trumpet; they carry about them Amulets, they recite cer∣tain praiers, & in joining battel they crie as loud as possible they can, Pharroh (I suppose this to be that military Barritus which Ammianus speaketh of) with this perswasion, Barritus. that he who crieth not as loud as the rest, shall have this accident befall unto him, suddenly to bee taken up from the ground, and carried, as it were flying in the aire (avoiding ever after the sight of men) into a certaine vale in Kerry, as I have said before. Such as visite and sit by one that lieth sicke in bed, never speake word of God, nor of the salvation of his soul, ne yet of making his will, but all to put him in hope of his recovering: If any one call for the sacrament, him they count past hope and recovery. The wives passe not for any will-making, because it is grown now to be a common custome, that a third part of the goods shall bee given unto them, and the rest to bee divided by even portions among the children; saving that when they come to enter upon the inheritance▪ be that is mightiest carrieth away the best share. For he that is strongest, be he unkle or nephew, most times sei∣zeth upon the inheritance, and shutteth the children out of all. When one lieth ready to die, before he is quite gone, certaine women, hired of purpose to lament, standing in the mee∣ting of crosse high-wayes, and holding their hands all abroad, call unto him with certain out-cries fitted for the nonce, and goe about to stay his soule, as it laboureth to get forth of the bodie, by reckoning up the commodities that he enjoyeth of wordly goods, of wives, of beauty, fame, kinsfolke, friends, and horses; and demanding of him why he will depart? and whither? and to whom? yea they expostulate with his soule, objecting that she is unthankfull. At length they piteously make moane, and say, that the soule now ready to leave the body is going away to these kinde of haggish women that appeare by night and in darknesse: but after it is departed once out of the body, they keepe a mourning and wai∣ling for it, with loud howling and clapping of their hands together. Now they follow the corps when it goes to buriall with such a peale of out-cries, that a man would thinke the quicke as well as the dead past all recoverie. In these wailings and lamentations the nurses, daughters and concubines make the greatest adoe, and are most vehement. Nei∣ther doe they mourne with lesse sorrow and heavinesse for those that are slaine in battaile, than such as die of sicknesse: although they affirme, that they have an easier death who lose their lives in fighting in the field, or in robbing. Yet notwithstanding they raile upon their enemies with most spitefull words, and continue for a long time deadly hatred a∣gainst all of that sept and kinred. They suppose that the soules of such as are deceased goe into the company of certaine men, famous in those places, touching whom they retaine still fables and songs, as of Giants, Fin-Mac-Huyle, Osker Mac-Oshin, and they say that by illusion they often times doe see such. As for their meats, Water-cresses. Shamroots. they feed willingly upon herbs, and watercresses especially, up∣on mushromes, shamroots, and roots: so that Strabo not without good cause said they were , i. Eaters of herbes, for which in some copies is falsly read i. Great Eaters. They delight also in butter tempered with oate-meale, in milke, whey, beefe-broth, and flesh oftentimes without any bread at all. As for the corne that they have, they lay it up for their horses provender, for whom verily they are es∣pecially carefull. When they be hunger bitten in time of dearth, they disdaine not to devoure raw flesh, after they have pressed out the blood thereof: and for to concoct and digest it, they swill in and poure down the throat Uskebah draught after draught. They let their kine blood also, which when it is growne to a gelly, and strewed over with butter, they eat with good appetite. They goe for the most part bare headed, unlesse it bee when they put on an head∣piece. The haire of their head they weare long, and nothing set they greater store by than the glibbes or tresses of their haires; and to have the same plucked or twitch∣ed, they take it for a contumelious indignitie. They use linnen shirts, and those verily exceeding large, with wide sleeves, and hanging side downe to their very knees, which they were wont to staine with saffron. Little Jackets they have of woollen, and those very short: breeches most plaine and close to their thighes. But they cast over these their mantles or shagge rugges, which Isidore seemeth to call Heteromallae, with a deepe fringed pur le, and the same daintily set out with sundrie colours; within which they lappe themselves in the night, and sweetly sleepe on the very ground. Such also doe the women cast over the side garment that they weare downe to the foot, and with elnes (as I said) of Sendall rolled up in wreathes, they rather load than adorne their heads; like as they doe their neckes with chaines and carkaneth, their armes also with bracelets. These are the manners of the wild Irish, out of our Author: In the rest, for the most part all that inhabite the Eng∣lish Pale (as they tearme it) there is no point of curtesie and civilitie wanting: for which they are beholden to the English conquest: and for much more might the whole Island bee beholden unto it, in case upon a certaine peevish and obstinate love they beare unto their owne country fashions, they had not stopped up their eares and shut up their hearts against better governance. For the Irishry are so stifly settled in observing of the old rites of their country, that not onely they cannot be withdrawne from them, but also are able easily to draw the English unto the same (so prone is mans nature to entertain the worst) that one would not beleeve in how short a time some English among them degenerate and grow out of kinde. A PRAEFACE TO THE ANNALES OF IRELAND. T Hus far forward was the Printers presse a going when the Honourable Lord William Howard of Naworth, for the love that he beareth unto the studies of Antiquity, willingly imparted unto me the Manuscript Annales of Ireland, from the yeere of our Salvation MCLII. unto the yeere MCCCLXX. Which I thought good to publish; considering that after Giral∣dus Cambrensis, there is nothing, to my knowledge, extant better in this kind; and because so noble and worthy a person, whose they were by right in private before, permitted so much. Unto whom, the very same thankes in manner are duly to bee yeelded for bringing them to light, that were to be given unto the authour himselfe, who first recorded them in writing. And albeit they are penned in a stile somewhat rude and barrain (as those times required) yet much matter is therein contained, that may illustrate the Irish Historie, and would have given good light unto mee, if they had not come to my hands so late. Take them here therefore truly and faithfully exemplified, even as I found them, with all their imperfections and faults; and if you have any better, impart them with semblable courtesie unto us; if not, make use of these with us, untill some one come forth and shew himselfe, that will helpe us to a fuller Chronicle, and happilie continue the same in length even unto our daies with more elegancie of phrase, which verily would be no painfull work to be performed. THE ANNALES OF IRELAND. A Nno Domini MCLXII. Gregorie the first Archbishop of Dub∣lin, a man praise worthy every way, slept in the Lord: after whom succeeded holy Laurence O-Thothil, who was Abbat of St. Kemnus de Glindelagh. Thomas is made Archbishop of Canterburie. MCLXVI. Rothericke O-Conghir, Prince of Connaght was made King and Monarch of Ireland. MCLXVII. Died Maud the Empresse. The same yeere Almaricke King of Jeru∣salem tooke Babylon. And in the same yeere Dermoc Mac-Murrogh Prince of Leinster, whiles O-Rorke King of Meth was in a certaine expedition, carried away his wife, who was willing enough to be ravished. For her selfe made meanes to be taken as a prey, as we find in Cambrensis. MCLXVIII. Donate King of Uriel, founder of Mellifont Monasterie, departed in Christ. In the same yeere Robert Fitz-Stephen, neither unmindfull of his promise, nor a breaker of his faith, came into Ireland with thirtie Knights. MCLXIX. Earle Richard of Stroghul sent before him into Ireland a certaine young Gentleman of his owne family, named Remund, with ten Knights about the Ca∣lends of May. The same yeere the said Earle Richard, accompanied with two hun∣dred Knights or thereabout, and others to the number as one would say of a thou∣sand, arrived on the even of S. Bartholmew the Apostle. Which Richard verily, was the sonne of Gilbert Earle of Stroghul, that is, Chippestow, sometime Strogull. This Richard also was the sonne of Isabell, Aunt by the mothers side of K. Malcome, and William King of Scotland, and of David the Earle, a Gentleman of good hope: and the morrow after the same Apostles day they tooke the said Citie; and there Eva, Dermots daughter, was lawfully joined in marriage unto Earle Richard, and her father gave her. MCLXXI. S. Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterburie was slaine. In the same yeere the Citie of Dublin was by the Earle and his companie taken. And the same yeere was founded the Abbey de Castro Dei, that is, of Gods Castle. MCLXXI. Dermot Mac-Morrogh full of dayes was taken out of this world at Fernys, about the Calends of May. MCLXXII. The courageous King Henrie with 500. Knights arrived at Waterford, and among other things gave Meth unto Sir Hugh Lacie. The same yeere was foun∣ded the Abbey de Fonte vivo. MCLXXIV. Gelasius Archbishop of Armagh, the first Primate of Ireland, an holy man, aged and full of daies, rested in Christ. This Gelasius is said to bee the first Archbishop that wore the first pale; but others before him were in name onely cal∣led Archbishops and Primates, for the reverend regard and honour of St. Patricke, as being the Apostle of that nation: whose See was from the beginning had of all men in so great reverence, that not onely Bishops and Priests and those of the Clear∣gie, but Kings and Princes universally were subject to the Bishop thereof in all obe∣dience. After whom succeeded in the Archbishopricke Gilbert a Prelate of good memorie. MCLXXV. William King of Scotland was taken prisoner at Alnewicke. MCLXXVI. Bertram Verdon founded the Abbey of Crokisdenne. MCLXXVII. Earle Richard about the Calends of May died at Dublin, and was bu∣ried in the Church of the holy Trinitie at Dublin. The same yeere Vivian a Priest, Cardinall entituled of S. Stephan in Mount Caelius, came as Legat of the Apostolicall See into Ireland, sent from Pope Alexander. MCLXXVIII. The ninth day before the Calends of December, the Abbey de Sa∣maria was founded. The same yeere was founded Rose Vale, that is, Rosseglasse. MCLXXIX. Miles Cogan, and Ralph the sonne of Fitz-Stephen, his daughters husband, were slaine betweene Waterford and Lismore, &c. as we read in Cambren∣sis. The same yeere Hervie Mont-Marish entred the Monasterie of Saint Trinitie in Canterburie, who founded the Monasterie of Saint Marie de Portu, that is, Of Donbroth. MCLXXX. The Abbey of the Quire of Benet was founded. The same yeere was founded the Abbey of Geripount. The same yeere Laurence Archbishop of Dub∣lin, upon the 18. day before the Calends of December happily slept in the Lord within the Church of Saint Marie of Aux. After whom succeeded John Cumin, an Englishman borne in England at Evesham, chosen with good agreement and accord by the Cleargie of Dublin (the King by his industry procuring the same) and confir∣med by the Pope: which John afterwards founded the Church of Saint Patricke in Dublin. MCLXXXIII. The order of the Templars and Hospitallers is confirmed. The same yeere is founded the Abbey de Lege Dei, that is, Gods Law. MCLXXXV. John the Kings sonne, Lord of Ireland by his fathers gift, came into Ireland in the 12. yeere of his age, in the thirteenth yeere after his fathers comming, after the comming of Fitz-Stephen the fifteenth, in the 14. yeere from the comming of Earle Richard, and in the same fifteenth yeere returned. MCLXXXVI. The order of the Cartusians and of the Grandians is confirmed. In the same yeere Hugh Lacie was killed at Dervath treacherously by an Irishman; be∣cause the foresaid Hugh would build a castle there: and as he was teaching of an I∣rishman how to labour with an iron toole, to wit, a Pykax ; when Hugh bowed him∣selfe forward, he stroke him to the ground with both hands, and as he held down his head, the said Irishman with an axe chopt off Hugh Lacie his head, and there was an end of the conquest. In the same yeere Christian Bishop of Lismore, sometime Le∣gate of Ireland, an earnest follower of the vertues which he had seen and heard of his devout father Saint Bernard, and Pope Eugenius, a venerable man, with whom hee was in the Probatorie at Clarevall, who also ordained him to be the Legate in Ire∣land, after his obedience performed, within the monasterie of Kyrieleyson, happily de∣parted to Christ. Jerusalem was taken with the Lords Crosse, by the Soldan and the Saracens, after many Christians slaine. MCLXXXVII. Upon the Calends, or first day of July, was the Abbey of Ynes in Ulster founded. MCLXXXIX. Henry Fitz-Empresse departed this life, after whom succeeded his sonne Richard, and is buried in Font-Ebrard. In the same yeere was founded the Ab∣bey de Colle victoriae, that is, of Cnokmoy. MCXC. King Richard and King Philip make a voiage into the holy land. MCXCI. In the Monasterie of Clarevall, the translation of Malachie Bishop of Armagh was honourably celebrated. MCXCII. The Citie of Dublin was burnt. MCXCIII. Richard King of England in his return from the holy land, was taken pri∣soner by the Duke of Austrich, and he made an end by composition with the Empe∣rour, to pay for his ransome one hundred thousand markes, and with the Empresse, to pay thirtie thousand: also with the foresaid Duke 20. thousand markes, in regard of an obligation which he had made unto them for Henrie Duke of Saxonie. Now hee remained in the Emperours prison a yeere, sixe moneths, and three daies: For whose ransome all the Chalices in manner throughout England were sold. In the same yeere was founded the Abbey de Iugo Dei, that is, of Gods yoke. MCXCIIII. The reliques of S. Malachie Bishop of Clareval, were brought into Ire∣land, and with all honour that might be, received in the Monasterie of Mellifont, and the rest of the Monasteries of the Cistertian order. MCXCV. Matthew Archbishop of Cassile Legate of Ireland, & John Archbishop of Dublin carried away the corps of Hugh Lacie, the conquerour of Meth, from the I∣rish, and solemnely enterred it in the Monasterie of Blessednesse, that is, Becty. But the head of the said Hugh was bestowed in the Monastery of Saint Thomas in Dub∣lin. MCXCVIII. The order of Friers Preachers began in the parts about Tolouse, by Dominicke the second. MCXCIX. Richard King of England died: after whom succeeded John his brother, who was Lord of Ireland and Earle of Mortaigne: which John slew Arthur the law∣full heire, sonne of Geffrey his whole brother. And in this manner died Richard. When K. Kichard besieged the Castle of Cha∣luz in little Britaine, wounded he was to death with an arrow by one of those in the said Castle, named Bertram Gurdon. And when he dispaired of his life, hee demi∣sed the Kingdome of England, and all his other lands unto his brother to keep. All his Jewels, and one fourth part of his Treasure he gave unto his Nephew Otho, and another fourth part of his Treasure he gave, and commanded to be dealt among his servants and the poore. Now when the said Bertram was apprehended and brought before the King, the K. demanded of him in these termes: what harme have I done thee that thou hast slaine me? Unto whom without any manner of feare he answe∣red thus. Thou killedst my father, and two of my brethren with thine owne hand, and me also thou wouldest now have killed: Take therefore what revenge so ever thou wilt of me, for I passe not, so thou maist be slaine, that hast wrought so many mischiefes to the world. Then the King forgave him his death, and commanded that hee should be let goe at libertie, and to give him besides one hundred shillings sterling. But after the King was dead, some of the Kings ministers slayed the said Be am, and hung him up. And this King yeelded up his vitall breath the eighth day before the Ides of April, which fell out to be the fourth day of the weeke before Palme-Sunday, and the eleventh day after he was wounded: and buried hee was at Fo E ard, at the feet of his father. Touching whose death a certaine versifier saith thus. Isti in morte perimit formica leonem, Proh dolor! in tanto funere mundus obit. In this mans death, as is well seene, the Ant a Lion slaies, And in so great a death (alas) the world doth end her daies. The Corps of which King Richard is divided into three parts. Whence was this verse made. Viscera Carceolum, Corpus Fons servat Ebrardi, Et Cor Rhothomagum magne Richarde tuum. Thy bowels onely Carceol keeps, thy Corps Font-Everard, And Roan hath keeping of thy heart O puissant Richard. When King Richard was departed this life, his brother John was girt with the sword of the Duchy of Normandie by the Archbishop of Rhoan, the seventh day before the Calends of May next ensuing after the death of the aforesaid King: which Archbishop did set upon the head of the said Duke a Circle flower with golden ro∣ses in the top round about. Also upon the sixth day before the Calends of June hee was anointed and crowned King of England, all the Lords and Nobles of England being present, within the Church of Saint Peter in Westminster upon the day of the Lords Ascension: and afterwards was John King of England called to a Parliament in France by the King of France, to answer as touching the death of his Nephew Arthur, and because he came not, he deprived him of Normandy. The same yeere was the Abbey of Commerer founded. MCC. Cathol Cronerg King of Conaght founder of the Monastery de Colle Victoriae, that is, of the Hill of Victorie, is expelled out of Conaght. The same yeere was founded, the Monasterie de Voto, that is, Tynterne, by William Marshall, Earle Marshall and of Pembroch, who was Lord of Leinster, to wit, of Weisford, Ossory, Caterlagh, and Kildare, in regard and right of his wife: who espoused the daughter of Richard Earle of Stroghul, and of Eve the daughter of Dermot-Mac-Murogh. But because the foresaid William Earle Marshall was in exceeding great jeopardie both day and night in the sea, he vowed a vow unto our Lord Jesus Christ, that if he might be delivered from the tempest, and come to land, hee would make a Monasterie unto Christ and Marie his mother: and so it came to passe when hee was come safe to Weisford, he made I say the Monasterie of Tyntern, according to his vow, and called it the Monasterie De voto, that is, Of the vow. In the same yeere was founded the Monasterie de Flumine Dei, that is, Of Gods river. MCCII. Gathol Cronerg or Crorobdyr, King of Conaght, was set againe in his kingdome. The same yeere is founded the house of Canons or Regular Priests of St. Marie, by Sir Meiler Fitz-Henrie. MCCIII. The Abbey of S. Saviour, that is, Dowi ky, being founded, was in this yeere and the next following built. MCCIV. There was a field fought betweene John Curcie Earle of Ulster, and Hugh Lacie at Doune: in which battell many on both sides lost their lives. But John Curcie had the upper hand in fight. Afterwards, upon the sixth day of the weeke, being Good-friday, when the foresaid John was unarmed, and went by way of pil∣grimage bare foot and in his linnen vesture a visiting the Churches, as the manner is, treacherously he was taken prisoner by his owne people for a piece of money given in hand, and for a greater reward to be given afterward for a recompence; and so was delivered unto Hugh Lacie. But hee bringeth him unto the King of England, who gave unto Hugh Lacie the Earldom of Ulster, and the Seigniorie of Conaught, which belonged unto John Curcie. Then Hugh Lacie being Earle, rewarded all the foresaid Traitours that had betraied John Curcie, and gave unto them gold and silver, more or lesse: but straightwayes hung up all the Traitours aforesaid, and tooke away all their goods: and so Hugh Lacie ruleth over all Ulster, and John Curcie is condem∣ned to perpetuall prison, because he had before time beene a Rebell to John King of England, and would not doe him homage, and besides, blamed him about the death of Arthur the rightfull heire unto the Crowne. But whiles hee was in prison and in extreme povertie, having but little allowance, and the same course and simple, for to eat and drinke, he said, O God, wherefore dealest thou thus by me, who have built and re-edified so many Monasteries for thee and thy Saints? Now when he had ma∣ny times wailed and made loud moane in this wise, and therewith fell asleep, the ho∣ly Trinitie appeared unto him, saying: Why hast thou cast me out of mine owne seat, and out of the Church of Doun, and placed there my S. Patrick the Patron of Ireland? (Because indeed John Curcie had expelled the Secular Canons or Priests out of the Cathedrall Church of Doune, and brought the blacke Monks of Chester, and placed them in the said Church: And the holy Trinitie stood there in a stately shrine or seat, and John himselfe tooke it downe out of the Church, and ordained a Chappell for that Image, and in the great Church set up the image of S. Patrick, which displea∣sed the most High God:) therefore thus said God, Know thou well that thou shalt never enter into thy Seigniorie in Ireland. Howbeit, in regard of other good deeds that thou hast done, thou shalt with ho∣nour be delivered forth of prison: which also came to passe. And now by this time there arose a contention betweene John King of England, and the King of France, about a Seigniory and certain Castles: and this suit or controversie still depending, the King of France offered unto him a Giant or Champion to fight for his right. Then the King of England called to remembrance his most valiant Knight John Curcie, whom upon the information of others he had before cast into prison. The King therefore sent for John Curcie, and asked him if he were able to help and stand him in stead in a combat: then John answered and said, I will not fight for thee, but for the right of the Kingdome: for which afterward hee undertooke to doe his en∣deavour in single fight: and so refreshed himselfe with meat, drink, and bathing, and tooke the vertue of his owne fortitude and strength: and a day was appointed be∣tweene these Giants or Champions, namely, betweene John Curcie and the other. But when the Champion of France heard of his exceeding great feeding, and of his strength, hee refused the combat, and then was the said Seigniorie given unto the King of England. Then the King of France requested to see a stroake given by the hand of John Curcie: and he set a strong and doughtie good morion full of maile up∣on a great blocke or log of wood: and the foresaid John taking his skeine or sword, and looking back round about him with a stern and grim countenance, smote the mo∣ ion through, from the very crest downeward into the blocke, and the sword stucke in the wood so fast, that no other man but himselfe was able to plucke out the sword: then John at the request of the Kings easily pluckt it forth. And the Kings de∣manded of the foresaid John, wherefore he looked behind him with so grim a coun∣tenance before he gave the stroke; who answered, that if he had failed in giving that stroke, he would have slaine them all, as well Kings as others. And the Kings gave unto him great gifts, yea and the King of England rendred unto him also his Seignio∣rie of Ulster. But John Curcie attempted 15. times to saile over sea into Ireland, but was alwaies in danger, and the wind evermore against him: wherefore hee waited a while among the Monkes of Chester. At length he returned into France, and there rested in the Lord. MCCV. The Abbey of Wetheney in the countie of Lymericke was founded by Theobald the sonne of Walter Butler, Lord of Karryke. MCCVI. The order of Friers Minors was begun neere the citie Assisa, by Saint Francis. MCCVIII. William Breos is expelled out of England, and commeth into Ireland. England is interdicted for the tyrannie of King John of England. Likewise a great overthrow and slaughter hapned at Thurles in Mounster, committed upon the Lord Justice of Irelands men, by Sir Geffery Mareys. MCCX. John King of England came into Ireland, with a great fleet and a puissant armie: and for that the sons of Hugh Lacie, to wit, the Lord Walter Lord of Meth, and Hugh his brother, exercised tyrannie upon the Commons, and especially because they slew Sir John Curson, Lord of Rathenny and Kilbarrocke (for they heard that the foresaid John accused them unto the King) therefore I say the King drave the foresaid sonnes of Hugh Lacie out of the land: and they fled into France, and served in the Monasterie of Saint Taurin as unknowne, working about clay and bricke, and sometime in gardens as Gardiners: but at length they were knowne by the Abbat of the said Monasterie: and the said Abbat entreated the King for them, because he had baptized his sonnes, and was Godsib unto him as a Godfather many times: and Walter Lacie paid two thousand and five hundred markes: and Hugh Lacie payed a great summe of money unto the King for his ransome; and at the re∣quest of the said Abbat restored they were againe unto their former degree and Seigniorie. And Walter Lacie brought with him John the sonne of Alured, that is, Fitz-Acory, sonne to the foresaid Abbats whole brother, and he made him Knight, and gave unto him the Seigniorie of Dengle, and many other Lordships. Item, hee brought Monkes with him out of the same Monasterie, and gave unto them many fermes, and the Cell called Fourie, in regard of charitie, thankfulnesse, and counsell: and Hugh Lacie Earle of Ulster made a Cell for Monkes, and endowed them in Ul∣ster in a place called ..... But John King of England having taken many pledges and hostages as well of English as of Irish, and hanged a number of malefactours upon Jebbits, and setled the State of the land, returned into England the same yeere that he came thither. MCCXI. Sir Richard Tuit by the fall of a towre at Alone was crushed and whindred to death. This Richard was founder of the Monasterie de Grenard. MCCXII. The Abbey of Grenard was founded. In the same yeere died John Co∣myn Archbishop of Dublin, and was buried within the quire of the Church of the Holy Trinitie, who was founder of Saint Patricks Church of Dublin: after whom succeeded Henrie Londres, who is called Scorch Villeyn, by occasion of a certaine act of his: for that one day he called his tenants before him, to answer by what te nure they held of him. And those tenants shewed their deeds and charters: but he commanded the charters or deeds of these husbandmen his tenants to be burned: and then the Freeholders evermore called him Henrie Scorch-Villein: which Henrie Archbishop of Dublin was Justice of Ireland, and built Dublin castle. MCCXIII. William Petit and Petre Messet departed this life. This Petre Messet was Baron of Luyn hard by Trym; but because he died without heire male, the in∣heritance passed unto three daughters: the eldest of whom the Lord Vernail marri∣ed, the second Talbot wedded, and the other Lounders espoused, and so they parted the inheritance betweene themselves. MCCXIX. The Citie of Damieta, in the Nones of September was about the still time of midnight miraculously wonne, so that in the forcing and taking thereof there was not one Christian lost his life. In the same yeere died William Mareshal the el∣der, Earle Mareshall and of Pembroch, who begat on the daughter of Richard Strongbow Earle of Stroghul five sonnes; the name of the first sonne was William, the named of the second Walter, the name of the third Gilbert, the name of the fourth Anselme, the name of the fifth Richard, who was slaine in the warre of Kildare: and everie one of these five sonnes was Earle after their father by succession in their fathers inheritance, and none of these had issue: wherefore the inheritance went away unto the sisters, namely, the daughters of their father: the first was na∣med Maud Mareschal, the second Isabel Clare, the third Eva Breos, the fourth Johan Mount Chensey, the fifth Sibill Countesse Ferrers. Hugh Bigod Earle of Norfolk espoused Maud Mareschal, & he in the right of his wife was Earle Mareschal of Eng∣land: which Hugh begat Raufe Bigod, This place is corrupted in the copie. father of John Bigod, who was the sonne of the Ladie Bertha Furnival: also Isabell Lacie, wife to Lord John Fitz-Gefferey: and when Hugh Bigod Earle of Norfolke was dead, she bare John de G aren Earle of Surrey, and his sister Isabell Albeney Countesse of Arundell. Gilbert Clare Earle of Glocester espoused Isabel the second sister, who between them had issue Richard de Clare Earle of Glocester; and she was mother to the Ladie Anise Countesse of Denshire, who was mother to Isabel wife of the Lord Robert Brus Earle of Car∣ricke in Scotland, and was afterwards King of the same Scotland. Of Eva Brus the third sister was begotten Maud, who was the mother of the Lord Edmund Morti∣mer, and mother to the Ladie Eve Cauntelow, mother of the Ladie Milsond Mohun, who was mother of Dame Eleanor, mother to the Earle of Hereford. The Lord Guarin Mont Chensey espoused Johan Mareschall the fourth sister, of whom came Johan Valens. Sibyll the Countesse of Ferrers, to wit the fourth, had is∣sue five daughters: the first Agnes Vescie, mother to the Lord John, and the Lord William Vescie: the second Isabel Basset: the third Joan Mohun, wife to the Lord John Mohun, son of the Lord Reginald: the fourth Sibyll Mohun, wife to Lord Francis Bohun Lord of Midhurst: the fifth Eleanor Vaus, who was wife unto the Earle of Winchester: the sixth Agatha Mortimer, wife to the Lord Hugh Mortimer: the seventh Maud Kyme Lady of Carbry. All these abovesaid, as well males as fe∣males, are of the genealogie of the said William Earle Mareschal. MCCXX. The translation of St. Thomas of Canterburie. In the same yeere died the Lord Meiler Fitz Henrie, founder of the house of Connall, who is buried in the Chapter house of the same house. MCCXXIV. The Castle of Bedford was besieged, and the Castle of Trim in Ireland. MCCXXV. Roger Pippard died. And Anno MCCXXVIII. died William Pippard sometime Lord of the Salmons-leap. There departed likewise Henrie Londres, alias Scorch villeyn Archbishop of Dublin, and is interred in the Church of the Holy Trinitie at Dublin. MCCXXX. Henrie King of England gave unto Hubert Burk the Justiceship of Ire∣land, and a third pennie of rent, and made him Earle of Kent. And afterward the same Hubert was imprisoned; and great trouble arose between the King and his subjects, because he adhered to strangers more than to his owne naturall people. MCCXXXI. William Mareschall the younger, Earle Mareshall and of Pem∣broke died, who is buried within the Quire of the Friers Preachers in Kilkenny. MCCXXXIV. Richard Earle Mareshall and of Pembroke or Stroghull, on the first day before the Ides of April was wounded in battell, upon the plaine of Kildare; and some few dayes after died in Kilkenny, and there, hard by his naturall whole brother, to wit, William, lieth buried within the Quire of Friers Preachers, of whom it is thus written: Cujus sub fossa Kilkenia continet ossa. Whose bones bestow'd in grave so deep, Kilkenny towne doth safely keepe. MCCXI. Walter Lacie Lord of Meth departed this life in England, leaving be∣hind him two daughters his heires: whereof Sir Theobald Verdon married the first, and Geffery Genevile espoused the second. The whole yeere out of an old frag∣ment. MCCXLII. The Castle of Slegah was built by Morice Fitz-Gerald Justice of Ireland. King Edward the first marched into Wales with a great army, and sent to the said Justice that he would come to him with some forces out of Ireland, who ac∣cordingly came with the flower of the English in Ireland, and Phelin O-Conor, who was then King of Conacht in his company, and shortly returned with victorie & ho∣nour. Afterward the said Justice preied the countrey Tirconnell, and gave a moitie thereof to Cormac Mac-Dermot Mac-Rory, and carried with him pledges for the other moitie, and left them in the castle of Sleagh. Another expedition was made by the said Justice and the English; first he came to Sleigagh, thence to Hohossero∣vie Mac Morin the Tuesday after the feast of Peter and Paul, and Cormac-Mac-Dermot Mac-Rorie accompanied them. At that time O Donnel assembled all Ki∣neoill Conail against them at the ford of Ath-Shany, so that hee permitted neither English nor Irish to passe over the ford: whereupon the English resolved to send Cormac Mac-Rory O-Conor with a company of horse into the champion West∣ward, and they returned by an higher plaine over the moores Eastward to the ford of Quilvain upon the water Earne, so that O-Donnel knew nothing of those compa∣nies of horse, untill he saw them on that side of the river that he himselfe encamped: and when he saw the English at his backe, hee encountred them; but his army was put to rout, & Moyls Haghlin O-Donnel, commonly called King of Kineoil Conail, was slain, with Gylly Cavinelagh Obugill, and Mac-Derley King of Oresgael, with the principall men of Kineoil Conail. And many of the army of the said Justice were drowned as they passed over the water of Fin Northward, and among them in the rescuing of a prey there were slaine Atarmanudaboge, Sir W. Brit Sherif of Conacth and the young knight his brother. And afterward the said army spoiled the coun∣try, and left the Seigniorie of Kineoil Conail to Rory O-Coner for that time. There was another expedition also by the said Justice into Tirconnell, and great spoiles made, and O-Canamayu was expelled out of Kenoilgain, & he left the territo∣ry of Kenail Conail with Gorry Mac-Donald O-Donnel. There was another expedition also by the said Justice into Tireogaine against O-Neale, but he gave pledges for the preservation of his countrey. There was another expedition by the said Justice in Leinster against the Irishry, whom he pitifully outraged, and spoiled their land. In another expedition also the said Justice destroied Kenoilgain, and all Ulster in de∣spite of O-Neale, tarrying three nights at Tullaghoge. MCCXLIII. Hugh Lacy Earle of Ulster died, and is buried at Crag-fergous in the covent of the Friers Minours, leaving a daughter his heire, whom Walter Burk, who was Earle of Ulster, espoused. In the same yeere died Lord Girald Fitz-Moris, and Richard Burk. MCCXLVI. An earthquake over all the West about 9. of the clocke. MCCXLVIII. Sir John Fitz-Gefferey knight came Lord Justice into Ireland. MCCL. Lewis King of France and William Long Espee, with many other, are taken prisoners by the Saracens. In Ireland Maccanewey, a sonne of Beliol, was slaine in Leys, as he well deserved. MCCLI. The Lord Henry Lacie was borne. Likewise upon Christmas day, Alex∣ander King of Scotland, a childe eleven yeeres old, espoused at Yorke Margaret the King of Englands daughter. MCCLV. Alan de la Zouch is made Lord Justice, and commeth into Ireland. MCCLVII. The Lord Moris, or Maurice Fitz-Gerald deceaseth. MCCLIX. Stephen Long Espee commeth Lord Justice of Ireland. The Greene castle in Ulster is throwne downe. Likewise William Dene is made Lord Justice of Ireland. MCCLXI. The Lord John Fitz-Thomas, and the Lord Maurice his son are slaine in Desmund by Mac-Karthy: likewise William Dene Lord Justice of Ireland dejected, after whom succeeded in the same yeere Sir Richard Capell. MCCLXII. Richard Clare Earle of Glocester died: Item, Martin Maundevile left this life the morrow after Saint Bennets day. MCCLXIV. Maurice Fitz Gerald, and Maurice Fitz Maurice took prisoners Rich. Capell, the Lord Theobald Botiller, and the Lord John Cogan at Tristel-Dermot. MCCLXVII. David Barrie is made Lord Justice of Ireland. MCCLXVIII. Comin Maurice Fitz Maurice is drowned. Item, Lord Robert Ufford is made Lord Justice of Ireland. MCCLXIX. The castle of Roscomon is founded. Richard of Excester is made Lord Justice. MCCLXX. The Lord James Audeley came Lord Justice into Ireland. MCCLXXI. Henry the Kings sonne of Almain is slaine in the Court of Rome. The same yeere reigned the plague, famine, and the sword, and most in Meth. Item, Nicholas de Verdon and his brother John are slain. Walter Burk or de Burgo Earle of Ulster died. MCCLXXII. The Lord James Audeley Justice of Ireland was killed with a fall from his horse in Twomond: after whom succeeded Lord Maurice Fitz-Maurice in the office of chiefe Justice. MCCLXXIII. The Lord Geffrey Genevile returned out of the holy land, and is made Justice of Ireland. MCCLXXIV. Edward the sonne of King Henrie, by the hands of Robert Kelwarby a Frier of the order of Preaching Friers, and Archbishop of Canterburie, upon S. Mag∣nus the Martyrs day, in the Church of Westminster was anointed K. of England, and crowned in the presence of the Lords and Nobles of all England ; whose protestation and oath was in this forme: I Edward son and heire to King Henrie, professe, protest, and promise before God and his Angels, from this time forward to keep without re∣spect the law, justice, and peace unto the holy Church of God, and the people subject unto me, so far forth as we can devise, by the counsell of our liege and loiall ministers: also to exhibite condigne and canonicall honour unto the Bishops of Gods Church, to preserve inviolably whatsoever hath bin bestowed by Emperors and Kings upon the Church committed unto them, and to yeeld due honour unto Abbats & the Lords vessels, according to the advise of our lieges, &c. So help me God, and the holy Gos∣pels of the Lord. In the same yeer died the Lord Iohn Verdon ; likewise the Lord Tho∣mas Clare came into Ireland. Item, William Fitz-Roger, Prior of the Hospitalers, with many others, are taken prisoners at Glyndelory: and more there slaine. MCCLXXV. The castle of Roscoman is erected againe. In the same yeere Moydagh was taken prisoner at Norragh by Sir Walter Faunte. MCCLXXVI. Robert Ufford is made Lord Justice of Ireland the second time: Gef∣frey Genevile gave place, and departed. MCCLXXVII. O-Brene is slaine. MCCLXXVIII. The Lord David Barry died. Likewise the Lord John Cogan. MCCLXXIX. The Lord Robert Ufford entred into England, and appointed in his roome Frier Robert Fulborne Bishop of Waterford, in whose time the money was changed, likewise the Round table was holden at Kenilworth by the Lord Roger Mortimer. MCCLXXX. Robert Ufford returned out of England, Lord Justice as before. Also the wife of Robert Ufford deceased. MCCLXXXI. Adam Cusack the younger slew William Barret, and many others in Connaght. Item, Frier Stephen Fulborne is made Justice of Ireland. Item, the Lord Robert Ufford returned into England. MCCLXXXII. Moritagh and Arte Mac-Murgh his brother are slaine at Arclowe, on the Even of Saint Marie Maudlen. Likewise the Lord Roger Mortimer died. MCCLXXXIII. The citie of Dublin was in part burnt, and the Belfray of Saint Tri∣nitie Church in Dublin, the third day before the Nones of Januarie. MCCLXXXIIII. The castle of Ley was taken and burnt by the Potentates or Lords of Offaly, the morrow after Saint Barnabe the Apostle his day. Alphonsus the Kings sonne twelve yeeres old, changed his life. MCCLXXXV. The Lord Theobald Botiller died the sixth day before the Kalends of October in the castle of Arclowe, and was buried there in the covent of the Friers preachers. Item, Girald Fitz-Maurice was taken prisoner by his own Irish in Offalie, and Richard Petit and Saint- Doget, with many other: and a great overthrow was gi∣ven at Rathode with much slaughter. MCCLXXXVI. Norragh and Arstoll, with other townes, were one after another con∣tinually burnt by Philip Stanton, the 16. day before the Calends of December. In these daies Alianor Queen of England, mother of King Edward, tooke the mantle and the ring at Ambresburie, upon the day of Saint Thomas his translation, having her dower in the kingdome of England confirmed by the Pope to be possessed for ever. Likewise Calwagh is taken prisoner at Kildare. The Lord Thomas Clare departed this life. MCCLXXXVII. Stephen Fulborn, Archbishop of Tuam died: after whom there suc∣ceeded in the office of Lord chiefe Justice for a time, John Sampford archbishop of Dublin. In the same yeer the King of Hungary forsaking the Christian faith, became an Apostata: and when hee had called fraudulently, as it were to a Parliament, the mightier potentates of his land, Miramomelius a puissant Saracene came upon them with 20000. souldiers, carrying away with him the King, with all the Christians there assembled on the even of Saint John Baptists day: as the Christians therefore jour∣nied, the weather that was cleere and faire turned to be cloudie, and suddenly a tem∣pest of haile killed many thousands of the Infidels together: The Christians retur∣ned to their owne homes, and the Apostata King alone went with the Saracenes. The Hungarians therefore crowning his sonne King, continued in the Catholike faith. MCCLXXXIX. Tripolis a famous citie was laied even with the ground, not without much effusion of Christian blood, and that by the Soldan of Babylon: who comman∣ded the images of the Saints to bee drawne and dragged at horses tailes, in contempt of the name of Christ, through the citie newly destroyed. MCCXC. Inclyta Stirps Regis Sponsis datur ordine legis. In lawfull guise (by hand and ring) Espoused is the Kings off-spring. The Lord Gilbert Clare tooke to wife the Ladie Joan, a daughter of the Lord King Edward, in the Abbey or Covent Church of Westminster; and the marriage was solemnely celebrated in the Moneth of May: and John, the Duke of Brabant his sonne, married Margaret the said Kings daughter also in the Church aforesaid, in the moneth of July. The same yeere the Lord William Vescie was made Justice of Ire∣land, entring upon the office on Saint Martins day. Item, O Molaghelin King of Meth is slaine. MCCXCI. Gilbert Clare, the sonne of Gilbert and of the Ladie Joan of Acres, was borne the 11. day of May, in the morning betimes. Item, there was an armie led into Ulster, against O-Hanlon and other Princes hindering the peace, by Richard Earle of Ulster, and William Vescie Justice of Ireland. Item, the Ladie Eleanor, sometime Queene of England and mother of King Edward, died in the feast of St. Iohn Baptist, who, in the religious habite which she desired, led a laudable life for the space of foure yeeres, eleven moneths, and sixe dayes, within the Abbey of Ambresby, where she was a professed Nun. Item, there resounded certaine rumours in the eares of the Lord Pope Martin, on the even of St. Mary Maudlen, as touching the Citie Acon in the holy land, which was the only refuge of the Christians; namely, that it was be∣sieged by Milkador the Soldan of Babylon, & an infinite number of his souldiers; and that it had been most fiercely assaulted about fortie daies, to wit, from the eighth day before the Ides of April unto the fifteene Calends of July. At length the wall was plucked down by the Saracens that assaulted it, and an infinite number of them entred the Citie, many Christians being slaine, and some for feare drowned in the sea. The Patriarch also with his traine perished in the sea. The King of Cypres and Otes Gran∣dison, with their companies, pitifully escaped by a ship. Item, granted there was unto the Lord Edward King of England by the Lord Pope Martin, the tenth part of all the profits of Ecclesiasticall benefices for seven yeeres in Ireland, toward the reliefe of the holy land. Item, the eldest sonne of the Earle of Clare was borne. MCCXCII. Edward King of England eftsoones entred Scotland, and was elected King of Scotland. Lord John Balliol of Galwey obtained the whole kingdome of Scotland in right of inheritance, and did homage unto the Lord Edward King of Eng∣land at New-castle upon Tine on S. Stephens day. Florentius Earle of Holland, Ro∣bert Brus Earle of Carrick, John Hastings, John Comyn, Patrick Dunbar, John Ves∣cie, Nicolas Soules, and William Roos, who all of them in that kingdome submitted themselves to the judgement of the Lord King Edward. Item, a fifteene of all secular mens goods in Ireland was granted unto the soveraign Lord King of England, the same to be collected at the feast of S. Michael. Item, Sir Peter Genevile Knight died. Item, Rice ap Meredyke was brought to York, and there at horses tailes drawne, &c. MCCXCIII. A generall and open war there was at sea against the Normans. Item, no small number of the Normans by fight at sea was slain by the Barons of the Ports of England, and other their co-adjutors, between Easter and Whitsuntide. For which cause there arose war between England and France: whereupon Philip King of France directed his letters of credence unto the King of England, that he should make perso∣nall appearance at his Parliament, to answer unto Questions which the same King would propose unto him: whose mandate in this behalf being not fulfilled, straight∣waies the King of France declaring by the counsell of the French the King of Eng∣land to be outlawed, condemned him. Item, Gilbert Clare Earle of Glocester entred with his wife into Ireland about the feast of S. Luke. MCCXCIV. William Montefort in the Kings counsell holden at Westminster before the King, died sodainly: which William was the Dean of S. Pauls in London, in whose mouth the Prelates, Bishops, and Cleargy putting their words which he was to utter, and doubting how much the King affected and desired to have of every one of them, and willing by him to be certified, in whom also the King reposed most trust, being returned to the King, and making hast before the King to deliver expresly a speech that he had conceived, became speechlesse on a sodain, and fell downe to the ground, and was carried forth by the Kings servants in their armes in piteous manner. In re∣gard of which sight that thus happened, men strucken with feare gave out these speeches: Surely this man hath beene the Agent and Procurator, that the Tenths of Ecclesiasticall benefices should bee paied to the King, and another author and procurer of a scrutinie made into the fold and flocke of Christ, as also of a contribu∣tion granted afterward to the King crying against William. Item, the Citie of Burde∣aux with the land of Gascoigne adjoining, was occupied or held by the ministers of the King of France conditionally: but unjustly and perfidiously detained by the King of France: for which cause John Archbishop of Dublin and certaine other Lords of the Nobilitie were sent into Almaine to the King thereof: and after they had their dispatch and answer in Tordran, the Lord Archbishop being returned into England, ended his life upon S. Leodegaries day. The bones of which John Sampford were enterred in the Church of Saint Patrick in Dublin, the tenth day before the Calends of March. The same yeere there arose debate betweene Lord William Vescy, Lord Justice of Ireland for the time being, and the Lord John Fitz-Thomas: and the said Lord Willi∣liam Vescy crossed the seas into England, & left Sir William Hay in his stead Justice of Ireland: but when both of them were come before the King to fight a combat, under an Appeal for treason, the foresaid William Vescy fled into France, and would not fight. Then the King of England gave all the Seigniories and Lordships which were the Lord William Vescies unto Sir John Fitz-Thomas, to wit, Kildare, Rathem∣gan, and many others. The same yeere Gilbert Clare Earle of Glocester returned out of Ireland into England: likewise Richard Earle of Ulster soon after the feast of S. Nicholas was ta∣ en prisoner by Sir John Fitz-Thomas, and kept in ward within the Castle of Ley, un∣to the feast of Saint Gregorie the Pope: whose enlargement was then made by the counsell of the Lord the King in a Parliament at Kilkenny: for the taking of whom, the foresaid Sir Iohn Fitz-Thomas gave all his lands, to wit, Slygah with the perte∣nances, which he had in Connaght. Item, the Castle of Kildare was won. Kildare and the country round about it is spoi∣led by the English and Irish. Caluagh burnt all the Rolls and Tallies of the said Earle. Great dearth and pestilence there was throughout Ireland this yeere, and the two next ensuing. Item, Lord William Odyngzele is made Justice of Ireland. MCCXCV. Edward King of England built the Castle de Bello-Marisco, that is, Beaumaris in Venedocia, which is called mother of Cambria, and of the common sort Anglesey: entring unto the said Anglesey straight after Easter, and subduing the Ve∣nodotes, that is, the able men of Anglesey under his dominion: and soone after this time, namely, after the feast of St. Margaret, Madock at that time the elect Prince of Wales, submitting himselfe to the Kings grace and favour, was brought by Iohn Haverings to London, and there shut up prisoner in the towre, expecting the Kings grace and benevolence. This yeere died Lord William Odingzele Justice of Ireland, the morrow after S. Mary of Aegypt: whom succeeded Sir Thomas Fitz-Maurice in the Justiceship. Item, about the same time the Irish of Leinster wasted Leinster, burning New-castle with other townes. Item, Thomas Torbevile a traitor of the King and the realm be∣ing convicted, was drawne through the middest of London lying along prostrate, guarded with foure tormentors disguised under vizzards, taunting and reviling him, and thus in the end was hanged upon a jibbet in chaines, so as his carcase might not be committed to sepulture, but kites, carrion crowes and ravens celebrated his fu∣nerals. This Thomas was one of them which at the siege of the Castle of Rions were taken prisoners and brought to Paris. Who spake unto the Peeres of France, and said, that he would betray the King of England into their hands: and leaving there his two sonnes for hostages, returned from the parts beyond-sea, joining himself un∣to the King of England and his counsell, relating unto them all how craftily he esca∣ped out of prison: and when hee had gotten intelligence of the Kings designement, and the ordering of the kingdome, hee put all in writing, and directed the same unto the Provost of Paris. For which being in the end convicted, he received the sentence of judgement aforesaid. Item, about the same time the Scots having broken the bond of peace, which they had covenanted with the Lord Edward King of England, made a new league with the King of France: and conspiring together, rose up in armes against their owne soveraigne Lord and King Iohn Balliol, and enclosed him within the inland parts of Scotland, in a castle environed and fensed round about with mountaines. They elected unto themselves, after the manner of France, twelve Peeres, to wit, foure Bishops, foure Earles, and foure Lords of the Nobilitie, by whose will and direction all the affaires of the kingdome should be managed. And this was done in despite, and to disgrace the King of England, for that against the will and consent of the Scots, the said John was by the King of England set over them to be their Soveraigne. Item, the King of England brought an armie againe toward Scotland in Lent following, to represse the rash arrogancie and presumption of the Scots against their owne father and King. Item, Sir Iohn Wogan was made Justice of Ireland, and the Lord Thomas Fitz-Maurice gave place unto him. Item, the said John Wogan Justice of Ireland made peace and truce to last for two yeeres betweene the Earle of Ulster, and Iohn Fitz-Thomas, and the Geraldines. Item, in these dayes about the feast of Christ his Nativitie, Gilbert Clare Earle of Glocester finished this life. I∣tem, the King of England sendeth his brother Edmund with an armie into Gas∣coigne. MCCXCVI. The Lord Edward King of England the third day before the Ca∣lends of Aprill, to wit, upon Friday, that fell out then to be in Easter weeke, wonne Berwicke, wherein were slaine about 7000. Scots, and of the English one onely Knight, to wit, Sir Richard Cornwall, with seven footmen and no more. Item, shortly after, namely, upon the fourth of May, he entred the Castle of Dunbar, and tooke prisoners of the enemies about fortie men alive, who all submitted themselves to the Kings grace and mercie, having before defeated the whole armie of the Scots, that is to say, slaine seven hundred men of armes: neither were there slaine of the English men in that service, as well of horsemen as of footmen, but ... footmen onely. Item, upon the day of Saint John before Port-Latin, no small number of Welsh∣men, even about fifteene thousand, by commandement of the King went into Scot∣land to invade and conquer it. And the same time the great Lords of Ireland, to wit, Iohn Wogan Justice of Ireland, Richard Bourk Earle of Ulster, Theobald Butler, and Iohn Fitz-Thomas, with others, came to aide, and sailed over sea into Scotland. The King of England also entertaining them upon the third day before the Ides of May, to wit, on Whitsunday, made a great and solemne feast in the Castle of Rokes∣burgh to them and other Knights of England. Item, upon the next Wednesday before the feast of Saint Barnabe the Apostle hee entred the towne of Ede burgh, and wonne the Castle before the feast of Saint John Baptist: and shortly after, even in the same summer, were all the Castles within the compasse of Scotland rendred up into his hands. Item, the same Lord John Balliol King of Scotland came, though unwilling, upon the Sunday next after the feast of the translation of Saint Thomas the Archbishop, to the King of England, with Earles, Bishops, and a great number of Knights beside, and submitted themselves unto the Kings grace and will, saving life and limbe: and the Lord John Balliol resigned up all his right of Scotland into the King of England his hand, whom the Lord the King sent toward the parts about London under safe conduct. Item, Edmund the King of Englands brother died in Gascoigne. MCCXCVII. Lord Edward King of England sailed over into Flanders with a power of armed men, against the King of France for the warre that was raised be∣tweene them: where after great expences and much altercation, a certaine forme of peace was concluded betweene them, with this condition, that they should submit themselves unto the ordinance of the Lord the Pope. From the one side and the other were sent certaine messengers to the Court of Rome, but whiles King Edward abode in Flanders, William Walleis by the com∣mon counsell of the Scots came with a great armie to the bridge of Strivelin, and gave battle unto John Earle Warren: in which battell on both sides many were slaine, and many drowned. But the Englishmen were discomfited and defeated. Upon which exploit all the Scots at once arose and made an insurrection, as well Earls as Barons against the King of England. And there fell discord betweene the King of England, and Roger Bigod Earle Mareschall; but soone after they were agreed. And Saint Lewis a Frier minor sonne of the King of Sicily, and Archbishop of Co∣lein died. Also the sonne and heire of the King de Maliagro, that is, of the Majoricke Ilands, instituted the order of the Friers minors, at the information of Saint Lewis, who said, Goe and doe so. Item, in Ireland, Leghlin, with other townes, was burnt by the Irish of Slemergi. Item, Calwagh O-Hanlan, and Yneg Mac-Mahon are slaine in Urgale. MCCXCVIII. Pope Boniface the fourth, the morrow after the Feast of the Apo∣stles Peter and Paul, after all tumults were appeased, ordained and confirmed a peace betweene the King of England and the King of France, with certaine condi∣tions that after followed. Item, Edward King of England set forth with an armie againe into Scotland, for to subdue the Scots under his dominion. Item, there were slaine in the same expedition, about the feast of Saint Marie Maudlen, many thou∣sands of the Scots at Fawkirk. The sunne the same day appeared as red as bloud over all Ireland, so long as the battell continued at Fawkirke aforesaid. Item, about the same time the Lord King of England feoffed his Knights in the Earldomes and Baro∣nies of the Scots that were slaine. More, in Ireland peace and concord was concluded between the Earle of Ulster, and Lord John Fitz-Thomas, about the feast of the A∣postles Simon and Iude. Also on the morrow after the feast of the 7. Saints sleepers, the sun-beames were changed almost into the colour of bloud even from the mor∣ning, so that all men that saw it wondred thereat. Moreover, there died Sir Thomas Fitz-Maurice Knight, and Sir Robert Bigod, sometime Lord chiefe Justice of the Bench. Item, in the Citie Artha, as also in Reathe in the parts of Italie, whiles Pope Boniface abode there at the same time there happened so great an Earthquake, that towres and palaces fell downe to the ground. The Pope also with his Cardinals fled from the Citie much affrighted. Item, upon the feast of the Epiphany, that is, Twelfe day, there was an earthquake, though not so violent, in England from Canterburie as farre as to Hampton. MCCXCIX. Lord Theobald Botiller the younger departed this life in the Manour de Turby the second day before the Ides of May: whose corps was conveied toward Weydeney, that is, Weney in the countie of Limeric the sixth day before the Calends of June. Item, Edward King of England tooke to wife the Ladie Margaret, sister to the noble King of France, in the Church of the holy Trinitie in Canterburie, about the feast of the holy Trinitie. Item, the Soldan of Babylon was defeated with a great ar∣mie of Saracens, by Cassian King of the Tartars. MCCXCIX. The day after the feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Marie, there was an infinite number of the Saracens horsemen slaine, besides the footmen, who were likewise innumerable. Item, in the same yeere there was a battell or fight of dogges, in Burgundie at Genelon castle: and the number of the dogges was 3000. and everie one killed another, so that no dogge escaped alive but one alone. Item, the same yeere many Irishmen came to trouble and molest the Lord Theobald Ver∣don, to the Castle of Roch, before the feast of the Annuntiation. MCCC. The Pollard money is forbidden in England and Ireland. Also in the Au∣tumne Edward King of England entred Scotland with a power of armed men: but at the commandement of Pope Boniface hee was stayed, and he sent solemne messen∣gers unto the Court (of Rome) excusing himself of doing any injurie. Item, Thomas the Kings sonne of England was the last day of May born at Brotherton, of Margaret sister to the King of France. Item, Edward Earle of Cornwall died without leaving behind an heire of his owne bodie, and was enterred in the Abbey of Hales. MCCCI. Edward King of England entred into Scotland with an armie: unto whom failed over sea Sir John Wogan Justice of Ireland, and Sir John Fitz-Tho∣mas, Peter Bermingham, and many others, to aide the King of England. Also a great part of the Citie Dublin was burnt, together with the Church of Saint Warburga, on S. Columbs day at night. More, Sir Geffrey Genevil espoused the daughter of Sir John Montefort: and Sir John Mortimer espoused the daughter and heire of Sir Peter Ge∣nevil. And the Lord Theobald Verdon espoused the daughter of the Lord Roger Mortimer. At the same time the men of Leinster made warre in winter, burning the towne of Wykynlo and Rathdon, with others: but they escaped not unpunished: because the more part of their sustenance was burnt up, and their cattell lost by de∣predation: and the same Irish had beene utterly almost consumed, but that the sedi∣tious dissention of certaine Englishmen was an hinderance thereto. Item, a defea∣ture and slaughter was made by the Toolans, upon a small companie assembled of the Brenies, in which were slaine almost three hundred robbers. Item, Walter Power wasted a great part of Mounster, burning many ferme houses. MCCCII. There died the ladie Margaret, wife to Sir John Wogan Justice of Ireland, the third day before the Ides of April: and in the week following Maud Lacy, wife to Sir Geffery Genevil died: also Edward Botiller recovered the manour de Haply Holl ¦wood. S. Bosco, with the pertenances, from Sir Richard Ferenges Archbishop of Dublin, by a concord made between them in the Kings bench, after the feast of S. Hilarie. Item, the Flemings gave an overthrow at Courteray in Flanders unto the army of the French, the Wednesday after the feast of the Translation of S. Thomas, wherein were slaine the Earle of Arthois, the Earle of Aumarle, the Earle of Hue, Ralph Neel Constable of France, Guy Nevil Mareschal of France, the sonne of the Earle of Hennaund, Godfrey Brabant with his sonne, William Fenys and his son, Iames S. Paul lost his hand, and fortie Baronets lost their lives that day, with Knights, Esquires, and others sans number. Item, the tenths of all Ecclesiasticall benefices in England and Ireland were exacted by Boniface the Pope for 3. yeeres, as a Subsidie to the Church of Rome against the King of Aragon. Also upon the day of the Circumcision Sir Hugh Lacie raised boo∣ties from Hugh Vernail. In the same yeere Robert Brus, then Earle of Carrick, espou∣sed the daughter of Sir Richard Bourk Earle of Ulster. Item, Edward Botiller espoused the daughter of Sir Iohn Fitz-Thomas: also the Citie of Burdeaux, with other Ci∣ties lying round about it, which by the sedition of the Frenchmen had been at any time alienated from Edward King of England, were restored unto him againe upon St. Andrewes even, by the industrie of the L. Hastings. MCCCIII. The Earle of Ulster, to wit, Richard Bourk, and Sir Eustace Pover, entred Scotland with a puissant armie: but after that the Earle himselfe had first made thir∣tie three Knights in the Castle of Dublin, hee passed over into Scotland to aide the King of England. Item, Gerald the sonne and heire of Sir Iohn Fitz-Thomas departed out of this world. In the same yeere Pope Boniface excommunicated the King and Queene of France and their children. Hee renewed also all the priviledges granted at any time unto the Universitie of Paris: and straight after the Pope was taken prisoner, and kept (as it were) in prison three whole daies. And soone after the Pope died: likewise the Countesse of Ulster deceased. Also Wulfrane Wellesly and Sir Robert Percivell were slaine the 11. day before the Calends of November. MCCCIIII. A great part of Dublin was burnt, to wit, the Bridge street, with a good part of the Key, and the Church of the Friers Preachers, and the Church of the Monks, with no small part of the Monasterie, about the Ides of June, to wit, on the Feast day of S. Medard. Also the first stone of the Friers Preachers Quire in Dub∣lin was laid by Eustace Lord Pover on the Feast of S. Agatha Virgin. Likewise after the Feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Marie, the King of France invaded Flanders againe in proper person, with a puissant armie. Then bare he himselfe bravely in the war, and fought manfully so long, untill two or three horses of service were slaine under him: but at last he lost his cap that under his hel∣met was put upon his head; which the Flemings taking up carried by way of scorn∣full derision upon a lance as a banner, and in all the famous Faires of Flanders, put it out at the high window of some place or stately house, like the signe of an Inne or Taverne, and shewed it in token of victorie. MCCCV. Jordan Comyn with his complices slew Moritagh O-Conghir King of Offalie, and Calwagh his whole brother, and certain others in the Court of Sir Piers Brymgeham at Carrick in Carbrey: likewise Sir Gilbert Sutton Seneschal of Weisford was slaine by the Irish neere unto a village ( or House ) of Haymund Grace, which Haymund verily in the said skirmish manfully carried himselfe, but stoutly escaped. Item, in Scotland the Lord Robert Brus Earle of Carricke, forgetting his oath made to the King of England, slew Sir John Rede Comyn within the cloisture of the Friers Minors of Dunfrese, and soone after caused himselfe to be crowned King of Scotland by the hands of two Bishops, to wit, of S. Andrewes and of Glasco, in the towne of Scone, to the confusion of himselfe and of many others. MCCCVI. A great discomfiture was made in Offaly, neere unto the Castle of Ges∣bill, on the Ides of Aprill, upon O-Conghor by O-Dympcies, in which was slaine O-Dympcey Leader of the Regans, with a great traine accompanying him. Also O-Brene King of Towmond died. Item, Donald Oge Mac Carthy slew Donald Ruff, that is, the Red King of Desmund. Item, a lamentable defeature fell upon the part of Piers Bry∣megham the fourth day before the Calends of May, in the Marches of Meth. Item, Balymore in Leinster was burnt by the Irish, where at the same time Henry Calfe was slaine: and there arose war betweene the English and the Irish in Leinster: for which cause there was assembled a great armie from divers parts of Ireland to bridle the malice of the Irish in Leinster: in which expedition Sir Tho. Mandevil Knight, and a brave warriour, had a great conflict with the Irish, neere to Clenfell ; in which conflict he behaved himselfe valiantly, untill his horse of service was slaine, and won much praise and honour by saving many a man, and himselfe also. Item, M. Thomas Cantock Chancellour of Ireland was consecrated Bishop of Ymelasen, in the Church of the holy Trinitie at Dublin with great honour: at whose consecration were pre∣sent the Elders of all Ireland, where there was so sumptuous and so great a feast made, first unto the rich, and afterwards to the poore, as the like had never been heard of before in Ireland. Item, Richard Feringes Archbishop of Dublindied in the Vigile of Saint Luke, after whom succeeded Master Richard Haverings, who occupied the Archbishoprick almost five yeeres by Apostolicall dispensation. Who also resigned up his Archbishoprick: after whom succeeded John Leth. The occasion and cause of his giving over (as the Arch-deacon of Dublin of good memorie, his Nephew hath reported) was this, for that one night hee dreamed, that a certaine Monster heavier than the whole world stood eminently aloft upon his brest: from the weight whereof he chose rather to be delivered, than alone to have all the goods of the world: but when he wakened hee thought with himselfe, this was nothing else but the Church of Dublin, the fruits where∣of hee received, and tooke no paines for the same. As soone as hee could there∣fore he came unto the Lord the Pope, of whom hee was much beloved, and there renounced and gave over the Archbishopricke. For hee had, as the same Arch∣deacon avouched, fatter benefices and livings than the Archbishopricke came unto. Item, Edward King of England in the feast of Pentecost, that is, Whitsontide, made Edward his son Knight in London; at which feast were dubbed about 400. Knights, and the said Edward of Caernarvan newly knighted, made threescore Knights of those abovesaid, and kept his feast in London at the New Temple, and his father gave unto him the Dutchy of Aquitaine. Item, the same yeere in the feast of Saint Potentiana, the Bishop of Winchester, and the Bishop of Worcester, by commandement from the Lord the Pope, excom∣municated Robert Brus the pretended King of Scotland, and his confederates, for the death of Iohn Rede Comyn. In the same yeere, upon S. Boniface his day, Aumarde Valence Earle of Pembroch, and Lord Guy Earle............ slew many Scots, and the Lord Robert Brus was defeated without the town of S. Iohns. And the same yeere a∣bout the feast of the Nativitie of St. Iohn Baptist, King Edward went toward Scot∣land by water from Newarke to Lincolne. Item, the same yeere the Earle of Asceles, and the Lord Simon Freysell, and the Countesse of Carricke, the pretended Queene of Scotland, daughter of the Earle of Ulster, were taken prisoners. The Earle of Asceles and the Lord Simon Freysell were first torne and mangled. As for the Countesse, she remained with the King in great honour, but the rest died miserably in Scotland. Item, about the feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Marie, two brethren of Robert Brus professing pyracie, went out of their gallies a land to prey, and were taken with sixteen Scots besides: and those two themselves were torne and tormen∣ted at Carlele, the rest hanged upon jebbits. Item, upon St. Patricks day there was taken prisoner in Ireland Mac-Nochi with his two sonnes, neere unto New castle, by Thomas Sueterby : and there Lorran O∣boni a most strong thiefe was beheaded. MCCCVII. The third day preceding the Calends of Aprill, was Marcord Ballagh beheaded neere unto Marton by Sir David Caunton a doughtie Knight: and soon af∣ter was Adam Dan slaine. Also a defeature and bloodie slaughter fell upon the English in Connaght by Os∣cheles, on Philip and Iacob the Apostles day. Item, the preading Brigants of Offaly pulled down the Castle of Cashill, and upon the Vigill of the translation of Saint Thomas they burnt the towne of Ly, and besie∣ged the Castle: but soone after they were removed by Iohn Fitz-Thomas, and Ed∣ward Botiller. Item, Edward King of England departed this life: after whom succeeded in the kingdome his sonne Edward, who most solemnly buried his father at Westminster, with great reverence and honour. Item, the Lord Edward the younger took to wife the Ladie Isabel, daughter of the French King, in St. Maries Church at Bologne: and shortly after they were both crowned in the Church of Westminster. Item, the Templars in the parts beyond sea, being condemned (as it was said) of a certaine heresie, were apprehended and imprisoned by the Popes Mandat. In Eng∣land likewise they were all taken the morrow after the feast of the Epiphany. Also in Ireland they were arrested the morrow after the feast of the Purification and laid up in prison. MCCCVIII. The second day before the Ides of April died Sir Peter or Piers Ber∣mingham, a noble vanquisher of the Irish. Item, on the fourth day before the Ides of May was burnt the Castle of Kenir, and certaine warders in it slaine, by William Mac-Balthor, and Cnygnismi Othothiles, and his abetters. More, on the sixt day preceding the Ides of June, Lord Iohn Wogan Justice of Ire∣land was defeated with his armie neere Glyndelory ; where were slaine Iohn called Hogelyn, Iohn Northon, Iohn Breton, with many other. Also, the sixteenth day going before the Calends of July, were burnt Dolovan, Tobyr, and other townes and villa∣ges bordering upon them, by the foresaid malefactors. Item, in England shortly after was holden a great Parliament at London; where∣in arose a dissension, and in manner a mortall conflict betweene the King and the Ba∣rons, occasioned by Piers Gaveston, who was banished out of the kingdome of Eng∣land the morrow after the feast of Saint John Baptist his Nativitie: and he passed o∣ver sea into Ireland about the feast of the Saints Quirita and Julita, together with his wife and sister, the Countesse of Glocester, and came to Dublin with great pomp, and there made his abode. Moreover, William Mac-Baltor, a strong thiefe and an Incendiarie, was condem∣ned, and had judgement in the Court of the Lord the King in Dublin before the chiefe Justice Lord John Wogan, upon the twelfth day preceding the Calends of September: and was drawne at horses tailes unto the gallowes, and there hanged ac∣cording to his deserts. Item, in the same yeere there was erected a certaine cisterne of marble, to receive water from the conduict head, in the Citie of Dublin, such an one as never was there before, by the dispose and providence of Master John Decer then Maior of the Ci∣tie of Dublin, who of his owne money defraied the charges for the building there∣of: and the same John a little before the time caused a certaine bridge to be made be∣yond the river Aven-Liffy, neere unto the Priorie of St. Wolstan: also the Chappell of Saint Ma ie to the Friers Minours, and there lieth he buried: the Chappell like∣wise of Saint Marie, to the Hospitall of Saint Johns in Dublin, &c. Item, the same John Decer was very beneficiall to the Covent of the Friers Preachers in Dublin: to wit, in making one Columne of stone in the Church, and gi∣ving one great broad altar-stone, with the ornaments thereto belonging. More, upon the sixth day of the weeke hee entertained the Friers, and tabled them at his owne charges (thus say Elders to the younger) in regard of charitie. More, in the Autumne, Lord Iohn Wogan sailed over the sea unto the Parliament of England: in whose place the Lord William Burke was made Custos of Ireland. Item, the same yeere, in the Vigill of Simon and Jude the Apostles day, the Lord Roger Mortimer arrived in Ireland with his wedded wife, the right heire of Meth, the daughter of the Lord Peter, sonne of Sir Gefferie Genevil : they entred I say into Ire∣land, and took seisin of Meth, Sir Gefferie Genevil yeelding unto them, and entring into the order of the Friers Preachers at Trym, the morrow after the day of St. Ed∣ward the Archbishop. Also, Dermot Odympoy was slaine at Tully by the servants of Sir Peter or Piers Gaveston. More, Richard Burgo or Burk Earle of Ulster kept a great feast at Whitsontide in Trym, and dubbed Walter Lacie and Hugh Lacie Knights. And on the even of the Assumption, the Earle of Ulster came against Piers Gaveston Earle of Cornwall, at Tradag. And at the same time he went backe againe, and tooke his passage into Scot∣land. Item, in the same yeere Maud the Earle of Ulsters daughter sailed over into Eng∣land, to contract marriage with the Earle of Glocester: and soone after within one moneth the Earle and she espoused one the other. Also, Maurice Caunton slew Richard Talon: and the Roches killed the foresaid Maurice. Item, Sir David Caunton is hanged at Dublin. Item, Odo the sonne of Catholl O-Conghir slew Odo O-Conghir King of Con∣naght. Item, Athi is burnt by the Irish. MCCCIX. Piers Gaveston subdued the O-Brynnes, Irishmen, and re-edified the new Castle of Mackingham, and the Castle of Kemny: he cut downe and cleansed the Pas betweene Kemny Castle and Glyndelaugh, mawgre the Irish, and so depar∣ted and offered in the Church of Saint Kimny. The same yeere Lord Piers Gaveston passed the seas over into England on the Vi∣gil of S. John Baptists Nativitie. Item, the wife of the Earle of Ulsters sonne, daughter unto the Earle of Glocester, upon the 15. day of October arrived in Ireland. Also on Christmas even the Earle of Ulster returned out of England, and landed at the Port of Tradagh. More, on the feast of the purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, Sir John Bone∣vile neere unto the towne of Arstoll was slain by Sir Arnold Pover and his complices, and buried at Athy in the Church of the Friers Preachers. Item, a Parliament was held at Kilkenny, in the Outas of the purification of the bles∣sed Virgin Mary, by the Earle of Ulster, and John Wogan Lord Justice of Ireland, and other Lords: wherein was appeased great discord risen betweene certaine Lords of Ireland: and many Provisoes in maner of Statutes were ordained, commodious and profitable to the land of Ireland if they had been observed. Item, shortly after that time returned Sir Edmund Botiller out of England, who there at London was before Knighted. Item, there crossed the seas into England out of Ireland, the Earle of Ulster, Roger Mortimer, and Sir Iohn Fitz-Thomas. Item, Sir Theohald Verdon died." MCCCX. King Edward and Sir Piers Gaveston tooke their journey toward Scot∣land, to fight against Robert Bru . Item, in the said yeere great dearth there was of corn in Ireland: an eranc of wheat was sold for 20. shillings and above. Also the Bakers of Dublin for their false waight of bread, suffered a new kinde of torment, which was never seen there before: for that on S. Sampson the Bishops day they were drawne upon hurdles through the streets of the Citie at horse-tailes. More, in the Abbey of S. Thomas Martyr at Dublin died Sir Neile Bruin Knight, Escheator to the Lord the King in Ireland: whose bodie was committed to the earth at the Friers minors, with so great a pompe of tapers and waxe lights, as the like was never seene before in Ireland. The same yeere a Parliament was holden at Kildare, where Sir Arnold Pover was acquit for the death of the Lord Bonevile, because he had done this deed in his owne defence. Likewise, on S. Patricks day, by assent of the Chapter, M. Alexander Bickenore was elected Archbishop of Dublin. Item, the Lord Roger Mortimer returned into Ireland within the Octaves of the Nativitie of the blessed Virgin Marie. Also the same yeere the Lord Henrie Lacie Earle of Lincolne died." MCCCXI. In Thomond at Bonnorathie there was a wonderfull and miraculous discomfiture given by the Lord Richard Clare unto the side of the Earle of Ulster: Which Lord Richard aforesaid tooke prisoner in the field the Lord William Burke, and John the sonne of the Lord Walter Lacie, and many others. In which battaile verily there were slaine a great number as well of the English as the Irish, the 13. day before the Galends of June. Item, Taslagard and Rathcante were invaded by the robbers, to wit, the O-Brines and O-Tothiles the morrow after the Nativitie of S. John Baptist. Whereupon soon after in Autumne, there was a great armie assembled in Leinster, to make head and fight against the said robbers, lurking in Glindelory and in other places full of woods. Also, a Parliament was holden at London in August, betweene the King and the Barons, to treat about the State of the kingdome, and of the Kings houshold, accor∣ding to the ordinance of sixe Bishops, sixe Earles, and sixe Barons, as they might best provide for the good of the Realme. Item, on the second day before the Ides of November, the Lord Richard Clare slew sixe hundred of Galegalaghes. More, on All-Saints day next going before, Piers Gaveston was banished the Realme of England by the Earles and Barons: and many good Statutes necessarie for the commonwealth were by the same Lords made. Which Piers abjured the Realme of England about the Feast of All-Saints; and entred into Flanders: foure moneths after the said Piers returned presently upon the Epiphanie, and by stealth entred into England, keeping close unto the Kings side, so that the Barons could not easily come neere unto him. And hee went with the King to Yorke, making his a∣bode there in the Lent: whereupon the Bishops, Earles, and Barons of England came to London for to treat about the State of the kingdome: for feare lest by oc∣casion of Piers his returne, the Common wealth should bee troubled with com∣motions. Item, Sir John Cogan, Sir Walter Faunt, and Sir John Fitz-Rerie Knights died, and were buried in the Church of the Friers Preachers at Dublin. Item, John Mac-Goghedan is slaine by O-molmoy. Item, William Roch died at Dublin with the shot of an arrow by an Irish moun∣tainer. "Item, Sir Eustace Power Knight died. Item, in the Vigill of Saint Peters Chaire began a riot in Urgaly by Robert Ver∣don. "Item, Donat O-Brene is traiterously slaine by his owne men in Tothomon. MCCCXII. Sir Peter or Piers Gaveston entred the castle of Scardeburgh, re∣sisting the Barons. But soone after the Calends of June hee yeelded himselfe unto Sir Aumare Valence, who had besieged him, yet upon certaine conditions named before hand: who brought him toward London. But by the way he was taken priso∣ner at Dedington by the Earle of Warwicke, and brought to Warwicke: whereup∣on, after counsell taken by the Earles and Barons, he lost his head the thirteenth day before the Calends of July: whose bodie lieth buried in the coventuall Church of the Friers Preachers at Langley. Item, John Wogan Lord Justice of Ireland led forth an armie, to bridle the ma∣lice of Robert Verdon and his abettors: which was miserably defeated the sixth day before the Ides of July: in which fight were slain Nicolas Avenel, Patrick Roch, and many others. For this fact the said Robert Verdon, and many of his complices yeel∣ded themselves unto the Kings prison at Dublin, in expectance of favour and par∣don. Also, on Thursday, the morrow after Saint Lucie Virgin, in the sixth yeere of King Edward, the Moone was wonderfully seene of divers colours: on which day determined it was, that the order of Templars should be abolished for ever. More, in Ireland Lord Edmund Botiller was made the Lievtenant of Lord John Wogan Justice of Ireland: which Edmund in the Lent following besieged the O-Brynnes in Glindelorie, and compelled them to yeeld, yea and brought them almost to confusion, unlesse they had returned the sooner unto the peace of the Lord the King. Item, the same yeere, on the morrow after Saint Dominickes day, Lord Maurice Fitz-Thomas espoused Katherin daughter of the Earle of Ulster, at Green-castle. And Thomas Fitz-Iohn espoused another daughter of the same Earle, the morrow after the Assumption, in the same place. Also, the Sunday after the feast of the exaltation of the holy Crosse, the daughter of the Earle of Glocester, wife to the Lord Iohn Burke, was delivered of a sonne. MCCCXIII. Frier Roland Joce Primate of Ardmach arrived at the Iland of Houth the morrow after the annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Marie: and rising in the night by stealth, tooke up his Crosier, and advanced it as farre as to the Priorie of Grace Dieu: whom there encountred certaine of the Archbishop of Dublins ser∣vants, debasing and putting downe that Crosier, and the Primate himselfe of Ard∣magh they chaced with disgrace and confusion out of Leinster. Item, a Parliament was holden at London, wherein little or nothing was done as touching Peace: from which Parliament the King departed, and tooke his journey into France, at the mandate of the King of France: and the King of England with many of his Nobles tooke the badge of the Crosse. Also the Lord John Fitz-Thomas knighted Nicolas Fitz-Maurice, and Robert Clonhull at Adare in Mounster. More, on the last day of May Robert Brus sent certaine Gallies to the parts of Ul∣ster with his rovers to make spoile: whom the men of Ulster resisted and manfully chased away. It is said that the same Robert arrived with the licence of the Earle to take truce. Item, in the same summer Master John Decer, a Citizen of Dublin, caused a neces∣sarie bridge to bee made from without the towne of Batiboght, unto the Causey of the Mil-poole of Clontarf, whereas before time the passengers that way were much endangered. But after he had defraied great charges thereabout, by reason of a mightie inundation and floud the bridge with the arches fell downe. Also, Master John Leeks Achbishop of Dublin in the feast of St. Laurence end∣ed this mortall life. Then in a schisme and division of sides were elected for to bee Archbishop of Dublin, Master Walter Thornbury the Kings Chancellor in Ireland, and Master Alexander Bicknore Treasurer of Ireland: but Walter Thornbury was drowned, and many others, to wit, about one hundred fiftie and sixe took the sea, and the night following were all drowned. At the time of the foresaid Walters death, Alexander Bicknore expected at home the Popes favour. The same Alexander was made Archbishop of Dublin. Item, the Lord Miles Verdon espoused the daughter of the Lord Richard Excester. Item, the same yeere the Lord Robert Brus overthrew the Castle of Man, and vanquished the Lord Donegan, O-Dowill on S. Barnabes day. And the Lord John Burck, heire unto Richard Earle of Ulster, died at Galwey on the feast of St. Marcellus and Marcellianus. Also, the Lord Edmund Botiller dubbed thirtie Knights in Dublin Castle on Sun∣day and St. Michaels day. MCCCXIV. The Knights Hospitallers had the lands given unto them of the Tem∣plars in Ireland. Item, Sir John Parice is slaine at Pount. Also, Lord Theobald Verdon came Lord Justice of Ireland on Saint Sylvesters day. Item, Sir Gefferey Genevile a Frier died the twelfth day before the Calends of November, and was buried in his owne order of the Friers Preachers of Trym: who was Lord also of the libertie of Meth. More, in the same yeere, and upon S. Matthew the Apostles day, Loghseudy was burnt: and on the friday following the Lord Edmund Botiller received his Com∣mission to be Lord Justice of Ireland. MCCCXV. On St. John Baptists day the Earle of Glocester had his deaths wound given him, and died, when many others, as it were, without number, were slaine in Scotland, and more taken prisoners by the Scots. For which cause the Scots became bold, and carried their heads aloft, and gat good land and tributes out of Northum∣berland. Item, shortly after this came the Scots and besieged the towne of Carlile, where James Douglas was squized to death by misfortune of a certaine wall falling upon him. The same yeere the Scots not contented with their owne land, arrived in the North part of Ireland at Clondonne, with sixe thousand fighting men and expert warriours: to wit, Edward Brus whole brother to Robert King of Scots, and with him the Earl of Morreff, John Meneteth, John Steward, the Lord John Cambel, Tho∣mas Randolfe, Fergus Andressan, John Bosco, and John Bisset, who seized Ulster into their hands, and drave the Lord Thomas Mandevile and other liege men out of their owne possessions. The Scots entred Ireland first on St. Augustines day, that was the Englishmens Apostle, in the moneth of May, neere unto Crag-fergus in Ulster: betweene whom and the English the first conflict was neere unto Banne, in which the Earle of Ul∣ster was put to flight: there were taken prisoners William Burk, John Stanton, and many others, and the Scots having slaine a number of the English, prevailed and had the day. The second conflict was at Kintys in Meth, wherein Roger Mortimer with his fol∣lowers was put to flight. The third conflict was at Sketheris hard by Arstoll, the morrow after the con∣version of S. Paul, wherein the Englishmen were chaced, and the Scots had the bet∣ter hand. And the foresaid Edward Brus soone after the feast of Philip and Jacob caused himselfe to be crowned King of Ireland: and they tooke Greene Castle, and left their men there, whom the Dublinians quickly after expelled, and recovered the said Castle to the Kings behoof, and finding Sir Robert Coulragh the Keeper of the Castle there, brought him with them to Dublin: who being imprisoned and put to short diet, ended his dayes. Item, upon Peter and Paul the Apostles day came the Scots before Dundalk, and won the towne, spoiled and burnt it, killing as many as made resistance: and a great part of Urgale was burnt by the Scots. The Church of the blessed Virgin Mary in Atterith, being full of men, women, and little children, was burnt by the Scots and Irish. In the same yeere the Lord Edmund Botiller, Justice of Ireland, about the feast of S. Mary Maudlen, assembled together a mightie power out of Mounster, Leinster, and other parts: and the Earle of Ulster on the contrarie side, as it were, comming from the parts of Connaght with an infinite army, met all together about Dundalk, and con∣sulted among themselves to kill the Scots; but how it is not knowne: the Scots fled, otherwise, as hope was, they had been taken prisoners. Which done, the Earle of Ulster, with the foresaid Justice and other great Lords, tooke in hand, after they had slaine the Scots, to bring the Lord Edward le Brus quicke or dead to Dublin: which Earle followed them in chase as far as to the wa∣ter of Branne, and afterwards the said Earle retired backe toward Coyners: which the said Brus perceiving, warily passed over the said water, and followed him: whom with some other of the Earles side hee put to flight, having wounded George Roch, and slaine others, namely, Sir John Stanton, and Roger de sancto Bosco, that is, Ho∣ly-wood: likewise on the part of Brus many were slaine, and the Lord Wiliam Burk was taken prisoner the tenth day of the moneth of September: and the Earle was defeated neere unto Coyners: and then the Irish of Connaght and Meth, rose up in armes against the King, and against the Earle of Ulster, and burnt the Castle of Atho∣lon and of Raudon, and many other Castles in the said war of Coyners. The Baron of Donell bare himselfe there right valiantly: but he lost much goods there, and the said Scots manfully chased them as far as to Cragfergus: and there on the Earls side they fled, and some entred the Castle and valiantly kept it: and afterwards came ma∣riners from the havens and Port townes of England, and on a night surprised the Scots, and slew fortie of them, and had away their tents, and many things else. And the morrow after the exaltation of the holy Crosse, the Earle of Morreff passed the seas into Scotland, and took the Lord William Brus with him, seeking for more war∣like and armed men, with foure Pirats ships full of the goods of Ireland: whereof one was sunke; all which time the said Brus laid siege to the Castle of Cragfergus. At the same time, Cathill Roge razed three Castles of the Earles of Ulster in Connaught, and many townes in the same Connaught he burnt and sacked. And at the same time the said mariners went to the said Castle, and the Lords there skirmished, and in the meane time slew many Scots; at which time Richard Lan de O-ferivill was by a cer∣taine Irishman slaine. Item, afterwards upon St. Nicolas day the said Brus departed out of Cragfergus, unto whom the Earle of Moreff presented himselfe with 500. men unto the parts a∣bout Dundalk they came together: and to them many fled, and some gave unto them their right hands: and from thence they passe on to Nobee, where they left many of their men about the feast of S. Andrew the Apostle: and Brus himselfe burnt Kenlys, in Meth, and Grenard Abbey: and the said Monastery he rifled and spoiled of all the goods in it: Also Finnagh and New-castle he burnt, and all that countrey: and they kept their Christmas at Loghfudy, and then burnt it. And after this they marched forward by Totmoy unto Rathymegan and Kildare, and the parts about Tristeldermot, and Athy and Reban, not without losse of their men. And then came Brus to Skethy, neere Arscoll in Leinster: where there encountred him in fight the Lord Edmund Botiller Justice of Ireland, and Sir John Fitz-Thomas, and Thomas Arnald Power, and other Noble-men of Leinster and of Mounster: insomuch as one of those Lords, with his army, was sufficient to vanquish the said Edw. and his forces. But there arose a dis∣cord among them, and so being disordered and in confusion, they leave the field unto the said Edward, according to that which is written, Every kingdome divided in it selfe shalbe made desolate. There also was slaine a noble esquire, and faithfull to the King and the Realme, Haymund Grace, and with him Sir William Prendregest, Knight. On the Scots part were slaine Sir Fergus Andressan, Sir Walter Morrey, and many others, whose bodies were buried at Athy, in the Covent of the Friers Preachers. Afterwards, the said Brus in his returne toward Meth burnt the castle de Loy: and then the said Scots depart away from Kenlis in Meth, against whom the Lord Roger Mortimer came with a great armie, well neere 15000. but, as it is thought, not true and faithfull among themselves, but now confederate with the Lord Roger, who a∣bout three of the clock began to flie, and turned their backs: and principally the La∣cies, leaving the Lord Roger alone with a few: whom it behoved then to flie toward Dublin, and to Sir Walter Cusake at the Castle of Trim, leaving with the Scots that countrey, and the towne of Kenlis. Also, at the same time the Irish of the South, to wit, the O-Tothiles and the O-brynnes, burnt all the South-country, namely, Arclo, Newcastle, Bree, and all the vil∣lages adjoining. And the O-Morghes fired and wasted part of the Leys in Leinster, whom for the most part the Lord Edmund Botiller Justice of Ireland slew, whose heads to the number of fourescore were brought to the castle of Dublin. Item, in the same yeere about the feast of the purification of the blessed Virgin Marie, certain Lords of Ireland, and the Lord Fitz-Thomas, the Lord Richard Clare, Lord John Pover, and the Lord Arnald Pover, for to establish peace & greater secu∣ritie with the King of England, came to Sir John Hothom, assigned there by the said King of England, which said Lords and Nobles sware to hold with the King of Eng∣land come life come death, and to their power to quiet the countrey and make peace, and to kill the Scots. For the performance whereof by the leave and helpe of God, they gave hostages and so returned: which forme if other Nobles of the land of Ireland would not keepe, they were generally held for the Kings ene∣mies. Item, there died Sir John Bisset. And the Church of the new towne of Leys with the steeple and belfray was by the Scots burnt. The Scots won the Castle of North∣burgh in Ulster. Also Fidelmic O-Conghir King of Connaght slew Rorke the sonne of Cathol O-Conghir. More, Sir William Maundevile died: and the Bishop of Conere fled to the Castle of Crag-fergus, and his Bishoprick was liable to an interdiction: and Sir Hugh Antonie is killed in Connaght. Item, in the same yeere, on Saint Valentines day, the Scots abode neere Geshil and Offaly: and the armie of the English about the parts of Kildare: and the Scots en∣dured so great famine, that many of them were starved to death: and for the same cause they tooke their way closely toward Fowier in Meth. The Sunday following so feeble they were, what with hunger, and what with travaile, that most of them died. And afterwards the Nobles came unto the Parliament, and did nothing there; but as they returned, spoiled all the countrey: and the Lord Walter Lacie came to Dublin, for to cleere himselfe of an imputation (touching his credit) laied upon him, and to tender hostages unto the Lord the King, as other Nobles had done: and the same time Edward Brus peaceably abode in Ulster. Item, the O-Tothiles and O-Brynnes, the Archibaulds and Harolds conspired and banded together: the towne of Wicklo, and the whole countrey they laied wast. And in the first weeke of Lent the Earle of Moreff sailed over into Scotland, and Brus held plees in Ulster, and caused many to be hanged. Also in the midst of Lent Brus held Plees, and slew the Logans, and took Sir Alan Fitz-Warin, and carried him into Scotland. Also in the same yeere Fennyngher O-Conghir slew Cale-Rothe, and with him of Galloglaghes and others about three hundred. The same yeere in Mid-Lent wheat was sold for 18. shillings, and at Easter following for 11. shillings. MCCCXVI. Lord Thomas Mandevile, with many others, came from Tredagh to Crag-fergus upon Maunday Thursday, and joyned battaile with the Scots, put them to flight, and slew thirtie of the Scots: and afterward on Easter even the said Lord Thomas with his men charged upon the Scots, and slew many of them about the Calends: and there was slain the said Lord Thomas Maundevile in his own country, in defence of his right. Item, in the parts of Connaght many Irish were slaine by Lord Richard Clare, and Lord Richard Bermingham. Item, on Saturday after the Lords Ascension, Donnyger O-Brynne a strong thiefe, with twelve of his confederates, was slain by Sir William Comyn and his followers, keepers of the peace, whose heads were carried to Dublin. Item, the Dundalkers made a rode against O-Hanlan, and slew of the Irish about two hundred: and Robert Verdon a warlike esquire there lost his life. Item, at Whitsontide the same yeere Richard Bermingham slew of the Irish in Mounster about three hundred or more: and afterwards at the feast of the Nativitie of S. John Baptist came Brus to the Castle of Crag-fergus, and commanded the kee∣pers to render up the Castle unto him, according to the covenant between them made, as he said: who answered, that they ought indeed so to doe, and willed him to send thirtie of his men about him, and required that he would grant them within life and limbe; who did so: but after they had received thirtie Scots into the Castle, they shut them up and kept them in prison. At the same time the Irish of O-mayl went toward the parts of Tullogh, & fought a battell: whereupon of the Irish were slaine about foure hundred, whose heads were sent to Dublin: and wonders were afterwards seene there. The dead, as it were, arose and fought one with another, and cried out Fennokabo, which was their signal. And afterward, about the feast of the translation of S. Thomas, there were rigged and made ready eight ships, and set out from Tredagh to Crag-fergus with victuals. Which were by the Earle of Ulster much troubled for the delivery of William Burk, who had been taken with the Scots: and the Saturday following there were made friends and united at Dublin the Earle of Ulster and the Lord John Fitz-Thomas, and many of the Nobles sworne and confederate to live and die for the maintenance of the peace of Ireland. The same yeere newes came out of Connaght, that O-Conghir slew many of the English, to wit, Lord Stephen of Excester, Miles Cogan, and many of the Barries and of the Lawlies, about fourescore. Item, the weeke after Saint Laurence feast, there arose in Connaght foure Irish Prin∣ces to make warre against the English: against whom came the Lord William Burk, the Lord Richard Bermingham, the Lord of Anry with his retinue of the country, and of the same Irish about eleven thousand fell upon the edge of the sword neere unto Anry ; which town was walled afterwards with the mony raised of armor and spoile gotten from the Irish: because every one of the English that had double armours of the Irish, gave the one halfe deale toward the walls of the towne Anry. Slaine were there Fidelmic O-Conghir, a petty King or Prince of Connaght, & O-Kelley, and ma∣ny other Princes or Potentates. John Husee a butcher of Anry fought there, who the same night at the request of his Lord of Anry stood among the dead to seek out and discover O-Kelley: which O-Kelley with his Costrell or esquire rose out of their lur∣king holes, and cried unto the foresaid man, to wit Husee, come with mee and I will make thee a great Lord in my countrey. And Husee answered, I will not goe with thee, but thou shalt goe to my Lord Richard Bermingham. Then said O-Kelley, Thou hast but one servant with thee, and I have a doughtie esquire, therefore come with mee that thou maist bee safe: unto whom his owne man also said, Agree and goe away with O-Kelley, that wee may be saved and inriched, because they are stronger than we. But the said John Husee first killed his owne servant, and O-Kelley and his Esquire: and cut off all their three heads, and carried them to his Lord Richard Bermingham: and that Bermingham gave unto the said John Hussee faire lands, and dubbed him Knight, as he well deserved. The same yeere about the feast of S. Laurence came O-Hanlan to Dundalk, for to destreine, and the Dundalkers with their men killed a number. Item, on Monday next before the feast of the nativitie of Saint Mary, came David O-Tothill with foure more, and hid himselfe secretly all night long in Coleyn wood: which the Dublinians and Sir William Comyn perceiving, went forth and manfully pursued them for sixe leagues, and slew of them about seventeen, and wounded many to death. Also, there ran rumors to Dublin that the Lord Robert Brus King of Scotland en∣tred Ireland to aid Edward Brus his brother, and the Castle of Crag-fergus in Ulster was besieged by the foresaid Scots. The Monasteries of St. Patrick of Dune, and of Seball, and many other houses as well of Monkes as of regular preaching Friers and Minors, were spoiled in Ulster by the Scots. Item, the Lord William Burk, leaving his son for an hostage in Scotland, is set free. The Church of Brught in Ulster being in manner full of folke of both sexes, is burnt by the Scots and Irish of Ulster. At the same time newes came from Crag-fergus, that those which kept the Castle, for default of victuals, did eat hides and leather, yea and eight Scots who before were taken prisoners: great pity and griefe that no man relieved such. And the Friday following newes were brought that Thomas the sonne of the Earle of Ulster was dead. Also the Sunday following the feast of the nativitie of the blessed Virgin, died Lord Iohn Fitz-Thomas at Laraghbrine neere unto Mayneth, and he was buried at Kildare among the Friers Minors. Of which Lord John Fitz-Thomas, it is said, that a little before his death he was created Earle of Kildare: after whom succeeded his sonne and heire the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn, a prudent and wise personage. And afterwards newes came that the Castle of Crag-fergus was rendred to the Scots, and granted there was to the keepers of it life and limbe. Also upon the day of the exaltation of the holy Crosse, Conghar and Mac-keley were slaine, with five hundred of the Irish, by the Lord William Burke and Richard Bermingham in Connaght. Item, on Munday before Holloughmas happened a great slaughter of the Scots in Ulster, by John Loggan, and Hugh Bisset ; to wit, one hundred with double armour, and two hundred with single armour. The number of those men of armes that were slaine in all, was three hundred be∣side footmen. And afterward, in the Vigill of Saint Edmund King there fell a great tempest of winde and raine, which overthrew many houses, and the Steeple of Saint Trinitie Church in Dublin, and did much harme on land and sea. Also in the Vigill of S. Ni∣cholas, Sir Alan Stewart, taken prisoner in Ulster by John Loggan and Sir John San∣dale, was brought unto the Castle of Dublin. In the same yeere newes arrived out of England, that the Lord King of England and the Earle of Lancaster were at variance, and that they were desirous one to sur∣prize the other: for which cause the whole land was in great trouble. Item, in the same yeere, about the feast of St. Andrew the Apostle, sent there were to the Court of Rome the Lord Hugh Despencer, & the Lord Bartholmew Baldesmere, the Bishop of Worcester, and the Bishop of Ely about important affaires of the Lord King of England, for Scotland: who returned into England about the feast of the pu∣rification of the blessed Virgin Mary. Also, after the said feast the Lacies came to Dublin, and procured an inquisi∣tion to prove that the Scots by their meanes came not into Ireland: which inqui∣sition acquitted them. Whereupon they had a charter of the Lord the King, of peace and upon the Sacrament given unto them, they tooke an oath to keepe the peace of the Lord King of England, and to their power to destroy the Scots. And afterwards, even in the same yeere after the feast of Shrovetide, the Scots came secretly as farre as to Slane, with twenty thousand armed men; and the armie of Ulster joyned with them, who spoiled the whole countrey before them. And after this, on munday next before the feast of S. Matthias the Apostle, the Earle of Ulster was taken in the Abbey of St. Mary, by the Maior of the Citie of Dublin, to wit, Robert Notingham, and brought to the castle of Dublin, where he was kept in hold a long time, and the chamber wherein hee lay was burned, and seven of the said Earles men were there killed. In the same weeke, and upon the Vigill of St. Matthias, came Brus with his armie toward Dublin: and because he had quickly intelligence of the said Earles apprehen∣sion, he tooke his journey toward the castle of Knocke, and entred the said castle, and tooke the Lord Baron of the same, namely, the Lord Hugh Tirell and his wife, who for a peece of money were delivered. And the same night, by common consent, the men of Dublin for feare of the Scots burnt St. Thomas street; and with the said fire the Church of St. Iohn, with the chap∣pell of S. Marie Maudlen was by casualtie burnt: yea and all the suburbs of Dublin were set on fire, together with the Monasterie of S. Mary, and the Church of St. Pa∣tricke in Dublin was by the said villaines spoiled. Item, the said Maior with the Communaltie destroied the Church of St. Saviour, which is the place of the Friers Preachers: and carried away the stones of the same place toward the building of the Citie wall, which hee then enlarged on the North side above the Key: because the wall at first went along by the Church of St. Owen, where a tower is to be seene beyond the gate; and in the Vintners street appeareth another gate. But afterwards the King of England commanded the Maior and Com∣munalty to make a covent Church of Friers as before. And after the feast of Saint Matthias, Brus understanding that the Citie was strongly walled and fortified, took his journey toward the Salmon leape, and there they pitched their tents, namely, Robert Brus King of the Scots, Edward Brus, the Earle of Morrey, Iohn de Men∣teth, the Lord Iohn Steward, the Lord Philip Mountbray, and abode there foure daies, and burnt part of the towne, brake downe the Church and spoiled it, and after∣wards marched on toward the Naas, and the Lacies against their oath conducted them and gave them counsell: and Sir Hugh Canon appointed Wadin White his wives brother to be their guide through the countrey, and they came to the Naas, and sacked the towne, brake into the Churches, opened the tombes in the Church∣yard to seeke for treasure, and did much mischiefe while they remained there for two daies together. And afterwards they went on toward Tristeldermot, in the second week of Lent, and destroied the Friers minors, the books, vestiments, and other or∣naments they had away, and then departed from thence to Baligaveran: and from Baligaveran leaving the towne of Kilkenny, they came as far as to Kallan, about the feast of St. Gregorie the Pope. At the same time there came letters from the Lord Edmund Botiller Justice of Ire∣land, the Lord Thomas Fitz-John then Earle of Kildare, the Lord Richard Clare, the Lord Arnald Pover, and the Lord Maurice Fitz-Thomas, for the delivery of the Earle of Ulster by mainprise, and by a writ of the Kings: about which nothing was then done. And afterward the Ulster men came with an armie, about two thousand, and craved the Kings aide for to destroy the Scots, as they said: for which cause the Kings stan∣dard was delivered unto them: and when they had it, they did more harme than the Scots, and fell to eating of flesh all Lent long, and wasted in manner the whole coun∣trey, whereby they purchased the curse of God and man. Item, a great overthrow was given unto the Irish, neere unto the desert of Dermot, that is, Trostil-Dermot, by Edmund Botiller. Also the same Edmund Botiller Lord Justice of Ireland for the time being, gave a great overthrow to O-Morgh at Balilethan. Then Brus with the Scots marched for∣ward as fa e as Limericke. But after that the bravest forces of the English in Ireland were assembled together at Ledyn, they retired privily by night from the castle of Conniger. And about Palme-sunday there came newes to Dublin, that the Scots were at Ke ys in , and the Nobles of Ireland at Kilkenny, and there levied a power to set forward against Brus: and the munday following the King gave commandement to the men of Ulster to speed them against the Scots, whose leader and head the Earle of Kildare, to wit Thomas Fitz-John was appointed to bee: and so they put themselves on their journey: and then was Brus at Cashill, and hee marched from thence to Nanath, and there abode, and all the lands of the Lord Butler hee burnt and destroied quite. MCCCXVII. Upon Mandie thursday the Lord Edm. Botiller the Lord Justice of Ire∣land, and Sir Thomas Fitz-Iohn Earle of Kyldare, because the King gave unto them the jurisdiction and liberty of the countie of Kildare, also Richard Clare with the ar∣my of Ulster, Sir Arnold Po r Baron of Donnoyll, Maurice Roch-fort, Thomas Fitz-Moris, and the Ca ntons with their retime assembled themselves together about the Scots: and for one whole weeke abode about them, and did nothing: whose forces were reckoned to be about 30000. strong. And afterwards upon thursday in Easter weeke, arrived Roger Mortimer at Yoghall with the Kings power, because hee was Lord Justice, and the munday following speedily took his journy toward the army, and sent his letters unto Edmund Botiller late (as it hath beene said) Justice, that hee should attempt nothing against the Scots before his comming. But before that Mor∣timer came, Brus was forewarned by some to depart from thence: who the night following tooke his journey toward Kildare, and afterwards in the weeke following every one of the English returned hence into their countrey: and the army of Ulster came to the Naas. And at the same time two messengers were dispatched from the city of Dublin, who passed the seas toward the King of England to aske advice, and to advertise as touching the State of Ireland, and about the deliverance of the Earle of Ulster. Also at the same time the Lord Roger Mortimer Justice of Ireland, and the Nobles of Ireland were at Kilkenny to dispose of Brus, but nothing effected they there at that time. And about a moneth after Easter Brus advanced with his army about 4. leagues neere unto Trim in a certain wood, and there staied a weeke and more to refresh his men, who with and travaile were almost perished, and for that many of them died there. And afterwards on Philip and Jacob the Apostles day the said Brus entred on his journy toward Ulster : and after the said feast came the Lord Roger Mortimer Justice of Ireland to Dublin, accompanied with the Lord John Wogan, and Sir Fulk Warin, with thirtie Knights and their traines: and they held a Parliament with all the Lords and Potentates of the land at Kylmainan ; but did nothing there save onely treat a∣bout the deliverance of the Earle of Ulster. And on the sunday before the feast of our Lords ascension, there repaired again unto the Parliament at Dublin the said Nobles of the land, and there they delivered the Earle of Ulster by mainpri e and hostages, and upon an oath. And the said Earle ha∣ving an oath tendered unto him, swore upon the Sacrament that hee would never worke or procure by himselfe or by any of his friends and followers, harme or grie∣vance upon the occasion of his apprehension unto the Citizens of Dublin, but that which himselfe might by order of law obtaine or get against the offenders or trans∣gressours in that behalfe, and thereupon hee had time and day untill the feast of the Nativitie of S. John Baptist: at which day he came not. Also in the same yeere Corne and other victuals were exceeding deere. A Cra∣nok of wheat was sold for three and twenty shillings, and wine for eight denires: and the whole land in maner was wasted by the Scots and Ulster-men: yea many house-holders, and such as had sustained and relieved a number of folk were driven to begge: and a number were famished. So great also was the death and dearth together, that the poore were pined with famine, and many died. At the same time came messengers to Dublin out of England, with grants of par∣don which they had at their will and pleasure: but before their comming, the foresaid Earle was delivered. And at the feast of Pentecost, Mortimer the Lord chiefe Justice took his journy towards Tredagh, and from thence to Trim, and sent his letters for the Lacies to repaire unto him, who contemptuously refused to come. And afterwards Sir Hugh Crofts Knight was sent unto the Lacies to treat about a peace, who by them was slain, the more the pity. And after that Mortimer L. Justice assembled his army against the Lacies, who seized upon their goods, cattell, and trea∣sure, and brought them to finall destruction, slew many of their men, and chased them into the parts of Connaght. And it was said, that Sir Walter Lacie went forth as farre as to Ulster to seeke Brus. Item, in the towne of St. Cinere in Flanders, about the feast of Pentecost, the Lord Aumar Valence and his sonne were taken prisoners, and conveied into Almaini And the same yeere, on Munday after the feast of the nativitie of S. John Baptist, the Potentates of Ireland assembled themselves to the Parliament at Dublin: and there was the Earle of Ulster enlarged, who tooke his oath, and found mainprisers or sureties to answer the writs of law, and to pursue the Kings enemies, both Irish and Scots. Item, upon the day of the Saints Pnocesse and Martinian, Sir Iohn Atly encountred at sea Thomas Dover a right strong thiefe, and took him, and about forty of his men well armed he slew, and his head he brought with him to Dublin. Also upon the day of the translation of S. Thomas, Sir Nicholas Bolscot came out of England with newes, that two Cardinals were come from the Court of Rome into England, to treat concerning a peace, and they brought a Bull to excommunicate all the troublers of the peace of the Lord the King of England. Likewise, the Thursday next before the feast of St. Margaret, Hugh and Walter Lacie were proclaimed seducers and felons to the King, because they had advanced their banner against the peace of the Lord King of England. More, on the sunday following, the Lord Roger Mortimer Justice of Ireland, took his journey to Tredagh with all his souldiers. At the same time the Ulster-men raised a bootie neere unto Tredagh: and the men of Tredagh went out and fetched the bootie backe againe: where was slaine Miles Cogan with his brother, and sixe other great Lords of Ulster were taken prisoners, and brought to the castle of Dublin. And afterwards Mortimer the Lord Justice assembled his army against O-Fervill, and commanded the Mal-passe to be cut downe, and destroied all his houses: and af∣terwards the said O-Fervil rendred himselfe to the peace, and put in hostages. Also the Lord Roger Mortimer Justice tooke his journey toward Clony, and made an inquisition or inquest, as touching Sir Iohn Blound (to wit, White) of Rathregan: which inquest accused the said Iohn ; whereupon he was of necessity to fine for two hundred marks: and afterward on sunday after the feast of the nativity of blessed Ma∣rie, the said Mortimer with a great power marched against the Irish of O-Mayl, and came to Glinsely, where many were slaine both of Irish and English, but the Irish went away with the worst: and soone after came O-brynn, and rendred him∣selfe to the peace of the King. And Roger Mortimer with his company came to the castle of Dublin. And upon the day of Simon and Jude the Apostles▪ the Archbales had peace by mainprise of the Earle of Kildare. And at the feast of Saint Hilary following there was a Parliament holden at Lin∣colne, about a treaty of peace betweene the Lord King of England, and the Earle of Lancaster, and between the Scots: and the Scots continued in peace, and by reason of that Parliament, the Archbishop of Dublin, and the Earle of Ulster staied in Eng∣land by the Kings commandement. And about the feast of the Epiphany there came newes to Dublin, that Sir Hugh Canon the Kings Justice in his bench, was slaine by Andrew Bermingham, between Naas and Castle-Martin. Item, at the feast of the purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, there came the Popes Buls, so that Alexander de Bicknor was confirmed and consecrated Archbishop of Dublin: and those Buls were read and published in the Church of the holy Trini∣ty. And at the same time was read another Bull, that the Lord Pope ordained peace between the Lord King of England, and the Lord Robert Brus King of Scotland for two yeeres: to which time the said Brus refused to condescend and agree. These things passed about the feast of St. Valentine. Item, the sunday following came the Lord Roger Mortimer to Dublin, and dubbed Iohn Mortimer Knight, with foure of his fellowes: and the same day Mortimer kept a great feast in the castle of Dublin. Item, at the same time a great slaughter was made of Irishmen in Conaght, through a quarrell betweene two Lords of Princes there: and slaine there were of both sides about foure thousand men: and afterwards there was taken great revenge upon the men of Ulster, who in the time that the Scots spoiled and preaded in Ireland, had done much harme, and eate flesh in Lent not of necessity: therefore much tribulation came upon them, insomuch that they did eat one another; so that often thousand there remained about 300. and no more, who escaped in maner all for to be punished. And here appeared the vengeance of God. Item, it was reported of a truth, that some of the foresaid evill doers were so hun∣ger-starved, that in Church-yards they tooke the bodies out of their graves, and in their skuls boiled the flesh and fed thereupon, yea and women did eat their owne children for starke hunger. MCCCXVIII. In the Quindene of Easter newes out of England arrived in Ireland, that the towne of Berwicke was betraied and taken by the Scots: and afterwards in the same yeere Master Walter Islep, the Kings Treasurer in Ireland, landed, and brought letters to the Lord Roger Mortimer, that he should addresse himselfe to re∣paire unto the King; who did so, and substituted the Lord William Archbishop of Cashil Custos of Ireland, who at one and the same time was Lord Justice of Ireland, Lord Chancellour, and Archbishop. And afterward, at the three weekes end after Easter, there came newes to Dublin that the Lord Richard Clare was slaine, and with him foure Knights, namely, Sir Henry Capell, Sir Thomas Naas, Sir James Cannon, and Sir John Caunton: also A∣dam Apilgard, with 80. other men, by O-Brene and Mac-Carthy, on the feast of Saint Gordian and Epimachus. And it was reported that the said Lord Richard his body was in despightfull malice cut into small pieces; but his reliques were enterred in Limerick among the Friers Minors. Item, on sunday in Mense Paschae, that is, a moneth after Easter, Iohn Lacy was led forth of the castle of Dublin, and brought to Trim, for to be arraigned and to heare and receive his judgment there: who was adjudged to be strait dieted, and so he died in prison. Item, the sunday before the Lords Ascension, Lord Roger Mortimer sailed over into England: but paied nothing for his victuals that he had taken up in Dublin and elsewhere, which amounted to the value of one thousand pounds. Also, the same yeere about the feast of S. Iohn Baptist the great grace and mercy of God was shewed, in that wheat which before was sold for 15. shillings, was now not worth above seven shillings, and oates were bought for five shillings: great plentie there was of wine, salt, and fish: and that in such sort, that about St. Iames day there was new bread to be had of new corne, a thing that never or seldome had been seen a∣fore in Ireland: and this was a signe of Gods tender mercy, and all through the prai∣er of the poore, and other faithfull folke. Item, the Sunday after the feast of Saint Michael, newes came to Dublin, that Lord Alexander Bykenore then the Kings Justice in Ireland and Archbishop of Dub∣lin was arrived at Yoghall. On S. Denis day he came to Dublin, and with great pro∣cession and honourable pompe of the religious persons and of others, as well of the Clergy as the Laity, he was received. Item, on Saturday falling out to be the feast of Pope Calixtus, a field was fought betweene the Scots and English of Ireland, two leagues from the towne of Dun∣dalk: to which battell came of the Scots part, the Lord Edward Brus (who named himselfe King of Ireland) the Lord Philip Mowbray, the Lord Walter Soules, the Lord Alan Stewart, with his three brethren: also Sir Walter Lacy, Sir Robert and Sir Aumar Lacy, John Kermerdyne, and Walter White, and about 3000. others. A∣gainst whom came into the field of the English side, the Lord John Bermingham, Sir Richard Tuit, Sir Miles Verdon, Sir Hugh Tripton, Sir Herbert Sutton, Sir Iohn Cu∣sack, Sir Edward and Sir William Bermingham, and the Primate of Armagh, who as∣soiled them all: Sir Walter Larpulk: and certain came from Tredagh, to the number of twenty, well appointed and choice souldiers, whom John Maupas accompanied: and so they joined the said battell. The English were the first that entred with great vigour upon the front and vaward, where the said John Maupas manfully and with much honour in this conflict slew the Lord Edward Brus: which John also was found slaine upon the body of the said Edward: and all the Scots in manner were killed up, even to the number of two thousand or thereabout: whereby few of the Scots esca∣ped, beside the Lord Philip Mowbray, who also was wounded to death: and Sir Hugh Lacy, Sir Walter Lacy, with some few others that were with them, made shift hardly to save themselves. This fortuned between Dundalk and Faghird. Now the head of the foresaid Edward, the said Lord John Bermingham brought unto the said Lord King of England: upon whom the King bestowed at the same time, the Earle∣dome of Louth to him and to his heires males, and the Barony of Aterith. And one quarter, with the hands and heart of the foresaid Edward, were carried to Dublin, and the other quarters divided and sent to other places. MCCCXIX. The Lord Roger Mortimer returned out of England, and is eftsoones made Lord Justice of Ireland. The same yeere at the feast of All-Saints came a Bull from the Pope to excommunicate Robert Brus King of Scotland at every Masse. Al∣so the towne of Athisell, and a great part of the country, was burnt by the Lord John Fitz-Thomas, whole brother of the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas. In this yeere the fore∣said Iohn Bermingham was created Earle of Louth. Also the Stone bridge of Kil-Coleyn was built by Master Moris Iacke, Canon of the Cathedrall Church of Kil∣dare. MCCCXX. In the time of Pope John the 22. and of the Lord Edward sonne to King Edward, which Edward after the comming of Saint Austin into England was the 25. King; also under Alexander Bicknore then Archbishop of Dublin beganne the Universitie of the said Citie of Dublin. The first that proceeded Master in the same Universitie, was Frier William Hardite, of the order of preaching Friers: which William under the said Archbishop solemnly commenced Doctor in Divinity. The second Master that proceeded in the same faculty, was Frier Henry Cogry, of the or∣der of the Friers Minors: the third Master that went forth was William Rodyard Dean of the Cathedrall Church of Saint Patricke in Dublin, who solemnly com∣menced Doctor in the Canon law. And this William was made the first Chancel∣lour of the said University. The fourth Master in sacred Theologie or Divinity, that went out, was Frier Edmund Kermerdin. Item, Roger Mortimer Lord Justice of Ire∣land returned into England, leaving in his place the Lord Thomas Fitz-John then Earle of Kildare. Item, the Lord Edmund Botiller entred into England, and so came to Saint James. Also the bridge of the towne of Leghelyn was built by Master Moris Iack Canon of the Cathedrall Church of Kildare. MCCCXXI. A very great overthrow, with much slaughter of the O-Conghors, was given at Balibogan the ninth day of May, by the men of Leinster and of Meth. Item, the Lord Edmund Botiller died in London, and lieth buried at Balygaveran in Ireland. Also Iohn Bermingham Earle of Louth, is made Lord Justice in Ireland. Likewise Iohn Wogan departed this life. MCCCXXII. Andrew Bermingham, and Nicolas de La-Lond Knight, and many o∣thers are slaine by O-Nalan on St. Michaels day. MCCCXXIII. A truce is taken betweene the King of England, and Robert Brus King of Scotland for 14. yeeres. Also Iohn Darcie came chiefe Justice of Ireland. Item, John the first begotten sonne of the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn Earle of Kildare, in the ninth yeere of his age ended this life. MCCCXXIV. Nicolas Genevile, sonne and heire to the Lord Simon Genevile, depar∣ted out of this world, and was buried in the Church of the Friers Preachers of Trym. Item, there hapned a great wind on twelfe day at night. Item, a generall murrain there was of oxen and kine in Ireland. MCCCXXV. Richard Lederede Bishop of Ossorie cited Dame Alice Ketyll upon her perverse hereticall opinion, and caused her to make personall appearance before him: and being examined as touching sorceries, he found by an enquest that she had practi∣sed sorceries: among which this was one foule fact of hers, that a certaine spirit na∣med Robyn Artysson lay with her: and that she offered unto him nine red cockes at a stone bridge, in a certaine foure crosse high way. Item, that she swept the streets of Kilkenny with beesomes, between Complin and Courefew, and in sweeping the filth toward the house of William Utlaw her sonne, by way of conjuring mumbled these words: Unto the house of William my sonne, Hie all the wealth of Kilkenny towne. Now the complices of the said Alice, and those that agreed unto this divelish and wretched practise of hers, were one Pernill of Meth ; and Basilia the daughter of the same Pernil. When the above named Alice was by inquisition attainted of these fore∣said imputations, the Bishop punished her by the purse, and caused her utterly to ab∣jure all sorcerie and witch-craft. But when afterwards shee stood convict eftsoones of the same crime, herselfe with the foresaid Basilia fled, but was never after found. As for the said Pernill, she was burnt at Kilkenny: but at the houre of death shee a∣vouched that the foresaid William deserved death as well as her selfe, affirming that he for a yeere and a day wore the divels girdle upon his bare bodie. Whereupon the Bishop caused the said William to bee apprehended and laid in prison for eight or nine weekes within the Castle of Kilkenny: and by the Bishops decree and appoint∣ment hee had two men to give attendance and to minister unto him, with expresse commandement, not to speake unto him but once a day, nor to eat or drinke with him. At length the said William, by the helpe of the Lord Arnald Poer Seneschall of the Countie of Kilkenny, was delivered forth of prison: and the foresaid William gave a great summe of money unto the abovenamed Arnold, to imprison the Bishop aforesaid. The Lord Arnold before named caused the Bishop aforesaid to lye in pri∣son about three moneths. Now among the goods and implements of the said Alice, there was a certaine holy Wafer-cake found, having the name of the Divell imprinted upon it: there was found also a boxe, and within it an ointment, wherewith she used to besmear or grease a certaine piece of wood called a Coultree: which being thus annointed, the said Alice with her complices could ride and gallop upon the said Coultree whethersoe∣ver they would, all the world over through thick & thin, without either hurt or hin∣drance. And because the foresaid things were so notorious, Alice was cited againe to appeare at Dublin, before M. Deane of the Church of St. Patricke, there to finde greater favour. Who there made her appearance, and craved a day of answer, under a sufficient mainprise and suretiship, as it was thought. But shee was no more to be seene: for by the counsell of her sonne, and others that were not knowne, was she kept hidden in a farme house or village, untill the winde served for England, and so she passed over: and never was it knowne whither she went. Now because it was found by the inquisition and recognizance of the said Parnell condemned to be burnt, that William Utlaw was consenting to his mother in her sorcerie and with-craft: the Bi∣shop caused him to be arrested and taken by the Kings writ, and to be kept in prison: who in the end through the supplication of great Lords was set free: yet with this condition, that he should cause the Church of S. Maries in Kilkenny to be covered all over with lead, and to doe other almes-deeds by a certaine time; which almes-deeds if he performed not within the said terme, then he should be in the same state where∣in he stood when he was taken by vertue of the Kings Processe. MCCCXXVI. A Parliament was holden at Whitsontide in Kilkenny: unto which Parliament came the Lord Richard Burk the Earle of Ulster, although he was some∣what weake and crazie: thither repaired also all the Lords and Potentates of Ireland: and there the said Earle made a great and noble feast unto the Lords and the people. Afterwards the Lord Earle taking his leave of those Nobles and Lords, went to A∣thisell, where he ended his life. And a little before the feast of S. John Baptist he was there enterred. The Lord William Burk became his heire. MCCCXXVII. There arose a quarrell and a fray betweene the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas and the Lord Arnald Pover: and the Lord Moris had in his traine and com∣pany, the Lord Botiller, and the Lord William Bermingham: and the Lord Arnald had in his retinew the Bourkeins: of whom the said Lord Morrice Fitz-Thomas slew many, and some he chased into Connaght. In the same yeere after Michaelmas the Lord Arnald came to aide the Bourkeins: and by occasion of certaine rude and uncivill tearmes which the Lord Arnald had given out, in calling him Rymour, the said Morice raised an armie againe, and to∣gether with Botiller and the said William Bermingham with a puissant hoast burnt the lands and possessions of the said Lord Arn ld in Ofath. Also the said William Bermingham fired the lands and man our houses of the Lord Arnald Pover in Moun∣ster; and Kenlys in Osserie he burnt: so that the Lord Arnald was forced to fly with the Baron of Donnyl to Waterford, and there they remained a moneth, untill that the Earle of Kildare, then Lord Justice of Ireland, and others of the Kings Counsel took a day betweene them: which day the Lord Arnald kept not, but came to Dublin, and passed the seas into England about the feast of the Purification: and after that Arnald had sailed over, the said Moris Botiller and the Lord William Bermingham with a great armie came, spoiled, harried, and burnt the lands of the said Arnald: and by reason of those puissant forces that they had led, and the many mischiefes which they had done, the Kings ministers of his Counsell feared lest he would besiege Ci∣ties: and therefore the Cities made provision with more warding and watching the while betweene. And when the said Lord Moris Botiler, and William heard that the Cities made such provision and preparation before hand, they gave intelligence un∣to the Kings Counsell that they would come to Kilkenny, and there cleere himselves, that they never thought to doe any noisance to the lands of their soveraigne Lord the King, but onely to be revenged of their enemies. Unto which Parliament came the Earle of Kildare then Justice of Ireland, the Prior of Kilmaynon, to wit, Roger Outlaw Chancellour of Ireland, Nicholas Fastoll Justice in the Bench, and others of the Kings Counsell: and the foresaid ( Moris and William ) demanded the Kings Char∣ter of peace, but they of the Kings Counsell warily making answer, tooke day unto the moneth after Easter, that they might with their fellowes of the Counsell, treat upon this point. In the same yeere before Lent the Irish of Leinster gathered themselves together, and set up a certain King, namely Donald the sonne of Arte Mac-Murgh. Who be∣ing made King, determined to set up his banner two miles from Dublin: and after∣wards to passe through all the lands of Ireland. Whose pride and malice God seeing, suffered him to fall into the hands of the Lord Henry Traharn ; who brought him to the Salmons leaps, & had of him 200. pound for his lives ransome, & then led him to Dublin, to wait there untill the Kings Counsell could provide and take order what to doe with him: and after his taking many infortunities lighted upon the Irish of Leinster, to wit, the Lord John Wellesley took David O-Thothiel prisoner, and ma∣ny of the Irish were slaine. The same yeere Adam Duff the sonne of Walter Duff of Leinster, and of the kinred of the O-Tothiles, was convicted; for that against the Catholike faith, hee denied the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, and held that there could not bee three persons and one God: and hee affirmed that the most blessed Virgin Mary, mother of our Lord, was an harlot: hee denied also the resurrection of the dead, and avouched that the sa∣cred Scriptures were fables, and nothing else: and he imputed falsitie upon the sacred Apostolicall See. For which and for every of these articles the same Adam Duff was pronounced an hereticke and blasphemer: whereupon the same Adam by a decree of the Church was on the Munday after the Outas of Easter the yeere 1328. burnt at Hoggis (Greene) by Dublin. MCCCXXVIII. On Tuesday in Easter week Thomas Fitz-John Earle of Kildare and Justice of Ireland died: after whom succeeded in the office of Justice, Frier Roger Outlaw Prior of Kilmaynok. The same yeere David O-Tothil, a strong thiefe and enemy to the King, a burner of Churches and destroier of people, was brought forth of the Castle of Dublin to the Tolstale of the Citie, before Nicolas Fastoll and Elias Ashbourne Justices in the (Kings) bench: which Justices gave him his judgement, that he should first be drawne at horses tailes through the midst of the Citie unto the gallowes, and afterward be hanged upon a jebbit, which was done accordingly. Item, in the same yeere the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas raised a great army to destroy the Bourkeins and the Poers. The same yeere also the Lord William Bourk was knigh∣ted at London on Whitsunday, and the King gave unto him his Seignory. Also in the same yeere Iames Botiller in England espoused the daughter of the Earle of Hereford, and was created Earle of Ormund, who before was called Earle of Tiperary. The same yeere a Parliament was holden at Northampton, where many of the Lords and Nobles of England assembled: and a peace was renewed betweene Scot∣land, England and Ireland by marriages between them: and it was ordained that the Earle of Ulster, with many Nobles of England, should goe to Barwick upon Tweed, to the espousals and assurance making. The same yeere after the said espousals and contract made at Barwicke, the Lord Robert Brus King of Scotland, and the Lord William Burk Earle of Ulster, the Earle of Meneteth, and many of the Scottish nobility arrived at Cragfergus peaceably, and sent unto the Justices of Ireland and to the Counsell, that they would come to Green Castle, to treat about a peace of Scotland and Ireland. Now because the said Justi∣ces of Counsell failed to come as the said King desired, he took his leave of the Earle of Ulster, and returned into his owne country after the feast of the assumption of the blessed Virgin Mary. And the Earle of Ulster came to Dublin unto the Parliament, and there stayed sixe dayes, and made a great feast, and after this went into Con∣naght. The same yeere, about the feast of Saint Katherin Virgin, the Bishop of Osserie certified the Kings Counsell there, that Sir Arnald Pover was convicted before him upon divers articles of perverse heresie. Whereupon, at the suit of the said Bishop, the said Sir Arnald by vertue of the Kings writ was arrested and layed up in the Ca∣stle of Dublin: and a day was given unto the Bishop for to come unto Dublin, to fol∣low the foresaid suit and action against the foresaid Lord Arnald: who made his ex∣cuse, that hee could not then come, because his enemies lay in wait for his life in the way: whereupon the Kings Counsell knew not how to make an end of this businesse; and so the Lord Arnald was kept in duresse within the Castle of Dublin untill the Parliament following, which was in Mid-lent, where all the Nobles of Ireland were present. In the same yeere Frier Roger Utlaw, Prior of the Hospitall of St. John of Jerusa∣lem in Ireland, Lord Justice and Chancellour of Ireland, was disfamed by the said Bi∣shop, and slandered to bee a favourer of heresie, a Counsellour also and a better of the said Lord Arnold in his hereticall naughtinesse. And because his person was thus villanously delamed, the said Prior went to the Counsell of the King, and put up a petition that hee might purge himselfe. Whereupon they of the Kings Counsell tooke advice, and upon consultation had, granted unto him that he might make his purgation: And they caused it to be proclaimed for three dayes, That if there were any person, who would follow suit and give information against the said Frier Roger, he might come in and put in his pursuit: But no man was found to follow the mat∣ter. Whereupon at the procurement of Sir Roger the Frier, there went out the Kings writ to summon the Elders of Ireland, to wit, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and foure Maiors of foure Cities, namely, Dublin, Corke, Limerick and Waterford, and of Tredagh: also the Sheriffes and Seneschals, yea and the Knights of the shire, with the Free-holders of the countie that were of the better sort, for to repaire unto Dub∣lin. And there were chosen sixe examiners in the said cause, to wit, M. William Rod∣yard, Deane of the Cathedrall Church of St. Patrick in Dublin, the Abbat of Saint Thomas, the Abbat of St. Maries, the Prior of holy Trinitie Church in Dublin, M. Elias Lawles, and M. Peter Willebey: These Inquisitours convented those that were cited, and they examined every one severally by himselfe: which examinats all up∣on their oathes deposed, that he was honest and faithfull, a zealous embracer of the faith, and readie to die for the faith: and in regard of this great solemnity of his pur∣gation, the said Frier Roger made a royall feast to all that would come. Also the same yeere in Lent died the said L. Arnald Pover in the Castle of Dublin, and lay a long time unburied in the house of the preaching Friers. MCCCXXIX. After the feast of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, the Nobles of Ireland came unto the Parliament at Dublin, to wit, the Earle of Ulster, the Lord Thomas Fitz-Moris, the Earle of Louth, William Bermingham, and the rest of the Lords: and a peace was renewed there betweene the Earle of Ulster, and the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas: & the said Lords with the Kings Counsel ordained there that the Kings peace should be fully kept: so that every Nobleman and Chieftaine should keep in his owne sept, retinew, and servants, and the said Earle of Ulster made a great feast in the Castle of Dublin: and the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas the morrow after kept a great feast within the Church of St. Patrick in Dublin: and Frier Roger Outlaw Justice of Ireland feasted likewise upon the third day at Kylmaynon, and so they departed. The same yeere on the Virgill of St. Barnabee the Apostle, Sir John Bermingham Earle of Louth was slaine at Balybragan in Urgal, by those of Urgal: and with him Peter Bermingham the said Earles legitimate and whole brother, also Robert Ber∣mingham the same Earles putative brother, Sir John Bermingham the son of his bro∣ther Richard Lord of Anry, William Finne Bermingham, the Unkles sonne by the mothers side of the foresaid Lord of Anry, Simon Bermingham the same Williams sonne, Thomas Bermingham the son of Robert of Conaght, Peter Bermingham the sonne of Iames of Conaght, Henry Bermingham of Conaght, and Richard Talbot of Malaghide a valiant man at armes, and two hundred with them whose names are not knowne. Item, after the foresaid slaughter the Lord Simon Genevile his men invaded the country of Carbry, for to spoile and harry them, in regard of their robberies and man∣slaughters committed many times in Meth: but before the said invasion, they of Car∣bry arose, and slew of the said Simons men threescore and sixteen. Also the same yeere on the morrow after holy Trinitie Sunday there came to Dub∣lin, John Gernon and Roger Gernon his brother in the behalfe of those of Urgal, and made humble request, that they might stand to be tried at the Common Law. And on Tuesday, which was the morrow after the feast of St. John Baptist, John and Ro∣ger hearing that the Lord William Bermingham was comming, departed out of Dub∣lin. The same yeere on the Vigill of St. Laurence, the Lord Thomas Botiller went with a great power into the parts of Ardnorwith, and there encountred the said Lord Thomas Williams Mac-Goghgan with his forces: and there was the said L. Thomas to the great losse of the land of Ireland, & with him were killed the Lord John Lede∣wich, Roger Ledewich, Thomas Ledewich, John Nangle, Meiler Petit, Simon Petit, David Nangle, Sir John Waringer, James Terel, Nicholas White, William Freines, Peter Kent, John White, and together with them one hundred and forty men whose names are unknowne. And on the tuesday next before the feast of St. Bartholomew, the body of the said Lord Thomas Botiller was conveied to Dublin, and bestowed in the house of the preaching Friers, but as yet not buried: and the sunday next ensu∣ing the feast of the beheading of St. Iohn Baptist, the said Lord Thomas his corps was very honourably carried through the city, and enterred in the Church of the preaching Friers, and the wife of the said Lord John that day made a feast. In the same yeere John Lord Dracy came Justice of Ireland the second time: and the said Lord John espoused the Lady Joan de Burk Countesse of Kildare, the third day of July, at Maynoth. Item, Philip Stanton is slaine. Also Henry Lord Traham is treacherously taken in his owne house at Kilbego by Richard the sonne of Philip Onolan. More, the Lord Iames Botiller Earle of Ormond burnt Foghird against Onolan, for the foresaid Henries sake brother of Botiller. The same yeere, on wednesday next after the feast of the Ascension of the blessed Virgin Mary, John Lord Darcy Justice of Ireland went toward the parts of New∣castle, of Mac-Kingham and Wikelow, against the O-Brynns: and the monday follow∣ing certain of Lawles were slaine, and many wounded, and namely, Robert Locam was hurt, and of the Irish the better sort were slaine, many likewise wounded, and the rest fled. But Murkad O-Brynne yeelded himselfe an hostage together with his son, un∣kle, and unkles sonne, and they were brought to the castle of Dublin. But afterwards delivered for other hostages the better sort of their sept and kin. The same yeere the Lord Justice, namely, the Lord John Darcy and those of the Kings Counsell in Ireland, about the feast of the Circumcision of our Lord, charged the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas of Desmund, that himselfe should come into the field with his forces for to vanquish the Kings enemies: giving him to understand, that their soveraigne Lord the King would provide for to defray the charges of him and of his army: and the said Moris came with his power, and Briene O-Brene was in his company: and their army consisted of ten thousand men: and the said Lord Moris advanced with his army first against the O-Nolanes, vanquished them, gat a great bootie, and wasted their lands with fire: and the O-Nolanes fled, and afterwards de∣livered hostages, who were sent unto the castle of Dublin. And afterwards the said Lord Moris made a journy against the O-Morches, who did put in their hostages for to keepe the Kings peace. The same time the castle of Ley which O-dympcy had won and kept, was rendred up to the said Moris. The same yeere after the Epiphany of our Lord, Donald Arts Mac-Murgh made an escape out of the castle of Dublin by a cord, which one Adam Nangle had bought for him: which Adam afterwards was drawne and hanged. MCCCXXX. Mighty winds were up in divers places, about the feast daies of St. Ka∣therine, S. Nicolas, and of the Nativitie of our Lord: by which wind part of the wall of a certain house fell downe, and killed the wife of Sir Miles Verdon with his daugh∣ter, on S. Nicolas even, such winds as the like were never seene in Ireland. Item, there was such an inundation of the water of Boyn, as never had been known before: by which flood all the bridges, as well of stone as of timber, standing over the said water, were utterly cast downe, unlesse it were Babe bridge. The water also carried away divers mills, and did much hurt to the Friers Minors of Trym, and Tre∣dagh, in breaking down their houses. The same yeere, about the feast of S. John Bap∣tist, there began a great dearth of corne in Ireland, and continued untill Michaelmas. Item, a cranoc of wheat was sold for 20. shillings: also a cranoc of oats for eight shil∣lings, and one cranoc of peason, beanes, and of barly for 8. shillings. And this dearth hapned by occasion of abundance of raine, so that much of the standing corne could not be reaped before the feast of St. Michael. The same yeere, the English of Meth made a slaughter of the Irish (to wit, of Mac-Goghigans people) about Lent, neere unto Loghynerthy, whereupon the said Mac-Goghigan in anger burnt in those parts 25. small villages, and sacked them: which the English seeing, gathered themselves together against him, and of his men slew one hundred, and among whom were slaine three Lords sons of the Irish. Item, the Lord William Burgh Earle of Ulster led forth an army out of Ulster into Mounster against Briene O-Brene. Also the Lady Joan Countesse of Kildare, was at Maynoth delivered of William her first sonne, that the Lord John Darcy had by her, whiles the Lord John abode in England. " Item, Reymund Lawles is slaine treacherously at Wickelow. More, a Parliament was holden at Kilkenny, by Frier Roger Utlaw the Prior of Kylmainon, then Lievtenant under the Lord Justice, at which were present Alexan∣der Archbishop of Dublin, the Lord William Earle of Ulster, the Lord James Earle of Ormond, the Lord William Bermingham, and Walter Burk of Conaght: and every of them with a great power set forward to expell Brien O-Brene out of Urkiff neere Cashill. Also, Walter Burk, with his army of Connaght, harried the lands of the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas, bringing back with him the booty to Urkiff. Item, the Lord Earle of Ulster, and the Earle of Desmund, namely, the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas (for this is the first time that I call him Earle) are appointed to the safe keeping of the Marshall at Lymeric, by Frier Roger Utlaw Justice of Ireland. But the Earle of Desmond by a wile escaped out of the custody of the said Marshall, and went his way. MCCCXXXI. The Lord Hugh Lacy with the Kings pardon and peace entred Ire∣land. Also the Earle of Ulster entred England. Also there was given an overthrow to the Irish in Okenseley by the English the one and twenty day of April. Item, the same day on the Vigill of Saint Marke the Evangelist, the O-Tothely came to Tanelagh, and robbed Alexander Archbishop of Dublin, tooke away three hundred sheepe, and slew Richard White and other honest men of his company. Then ran rumours to Dublin of that depredation and slaughter: and Sir Philip Bryt knight, and Frier Moris Fitz-Gerald Knight of the order of Knights Hospitalers, Hamnud Archdekyn, Iohn Chamberlane, Robert Tyrell, and the two sons of Reginald Bernewall, and many others, but especially of the retinew of the Lord Archbishop of Dublin, were by a traine or ambush slaine by David O-Tothill in Culiagh. Also the Lord William Bermingham led forth a great army against the foresaid I∣rish, and did much harme unto them, but more would have done, had he not beene empeached by the false promises of the Irish. Item, those of the English pale at Thurles gave a great overthrow unto Briene O-Brene, and slew many of the Irish in the moneth of May. Item, at Finnagh in Meth the English of the said pale defeated the Irish upon the e∣leventh day of June. Also, when famine encreased much in Ireland, the mercy of God so disposed, that upon the seven and twenty day of June there came to land a mighty multitude of great sea fishes, to wit, Thurlhedis, such as in many ages past had never beene seene, which by the estimation of many men amounted to the number of five hundred: and this hapned neere unto Connyng, and the water called Dodyz in the haven of Dublin, about evening: and Anthony Lord Lucy then Justice of Ireland, with his owne people and certain citizens of Dublin, amongst whom was Philip Cradock, killed of the fore∣said fishes above 200. and no man was forbidden to carry away, the same Justice gi∣ving order therefore. Item, Antony Lord Lucy Justice of Ireland ordained a common Parliament at Dublin, in the Utas of Saint Iohn Baptist: unto which certaine of the Ancients of the land came not. Then the said Justice removed to Kilkenny, proroging the said Parliament, from the foresaid Octaves unto the feast of Saint Peter ad Vincula. Unto which place there repaired the Lord Thomas Fitz-Thomas, and many other Nobles of the land, who came not in before, submitting themselves to the Kings grace and mercy. And the King for his part as much as concerned himselfe under a cer∣taine forme of pardon gratiously forgave all the mischiefes committed by the fore∣said persons in the land. Also the castle of Fernis is taken by the Irish perfidiously, and burned in the month of August. Item, the said Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas of Desmund is taken by order from the counsell at Lymerick by the said Lord Justice, the morrow after the assumption of the blessed Virgin Mary, and with the Justice brought to the castle of Dublin, the se∣venth day of October. Item, Henry Mandevile is apprehended in the month of September, and led to the castle of Dublin, by vertue of a warrant from Simon Fitz-Richard Justice in the Kings Bench. Item, Walter Burck, who with his two brethren of whole blood are taken in Con∣naght, by the Earle of Ulster in November, and conveied by the same Earle unto the castle of North-burg, in the month of Februarie. Also, the Lord William Bermingham, with his son Walter Bermingham, are atta∣ched at Clomell, by the said Justice in the moneth of February, notwithstanding the Kings charter or pardon given unto them before by the Justice above named, and are brought unto the Castle of Dublin the nineteenth day of Aprill. Item, the Irish of Leinster made spoile of the English, and burnt Churches: and in the Church of Freineston they burnt about fourescore men and women, and a cer∣tain Chaplain of the said Church, arraied in his sacred vestiments and with the body of our Lord, they repelled backe with their javelins when he would have gone forth, and burnt him with the rest in the Church. These newes came unto the eares of the Lord Pope, who sent his Bull or briefe unto the Archbishop of Dublin, commanding him to excommunicate the said Irish, and all their adherents, together with their reti∣nue and followers, and to interdict their lands. Now the Archbishop fulfilled the commandement of the Lord Pope: but the said Irish, contemning the said Bull, ex∣communication, interdiction, and chastisement of the Church, and continuing still in their wickednesse, drew themselves againe together, and invaded all the county of Weis ford, as farre as to Carcarne, and spoiled the whole country. Whom the English made head against, to wit, Richard White and Richard Fitz Henry, with the Burgesses of Weisford and other English, slew of the Irish about 400. and many others of them as they fled were drowned in the river which is called Slane. MCCCXXXII. William Bermingham is put to death and hanged at Dublin by the said Lord Justice, the eleventh day of July, and Walter his sonne is set free. The fore∣said Sir William was a noble Knight, and among many thousand knights most renow∣ned and excellent for feats of armes: Alas the day! great pity it was of him; for who relating his death can forbeare teares? But at length enterred hee was in Dublin a∣mong the preaching Friers. Also the castle of Bonraty was forced and rased to the very ground by the Irish of Totomon in July. Also the castle of Arclo by the said Ju∣stice, with the citizens of Dublin and the help of the English within the pale, was won from the Irish, and in the Kings hand, on the eighth day of August, & in part is newly erected. Also the Lord Antony Lucy Justice of Ireland is put out of his office, and re∣turneth into England with his wife and children in the month of November. In whose place also is set Iohn Lord Darcy Justice of Ireland: and he entred Ireland the thirteenth day of February. Item, the English of the pale gave a great overthrow to Briene O-Brene and Mac-Karthy, and slew many Irish in the parts of Munster. Item, there deceased John Decer a citizen of Dublin, and lieth buried in the Church of the Friers Minors: a man that did many good deeds. Also, a certain maladie named Mauses reigned all over Ireland, as well in old men and women, as in young and lit∣tle ones. Item, the hostages abiding in the castle of Lymericke slew the Constable of the same castle, and seized the castle into their owne hands: but after that the castle was recovered by the citizens, the same hostages were put to the sword and killed. Like∣wise the hostages tooke the castle of Nenagh, and when part of it was burnt, recove∣red it was againe, and the hostages were reserved. Also one P...of wheat about Christmas was commonly sold for 22. shillings: and straight after Easter, and so forward, for twelve pence. "Item, the towne of New-castle of Lions was burnt and sacked by the O-Tothiles. MCCCXXXIII. The L. John Darcy arrived Lord Justice of Ireland at Dublin. Item, O▪ Conghirs lost a great bootie, two thousand cowes and above, by the Berminghams of Carbery. Item, the Lord John Darcy Justice of Ireland caused the Pas at Ethergovil in Offaly to be cut downe, against O-Conghir. Item, the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Desmond is taken forth of the prison of Dublin, after he had beene imprisoned one yeere and a halfe, having gotten many mainprisers first, even the greatest and noblest personages of the land to be bound for him, in the forfeiture of life, losse of all their goods, if then the said Lord Moris attemp∣ted ought against the King, and if those Nobles abovesaid presented not his person unto the King for his demerits. Also William Burk Earle of Ulster, betweene the New-towne and Cragfergus in Ulster, was traiterously (the more pitty) slaine by his owne company, in the twentieth yeere of his age, and the sixth day of the month Iune : Robert the sonne of Mauriton Maundevil was hee that gave him his first wound. Upon the hearing of which ru∣mours, the Earles wife being then in the parts of Ulster with her daughter and heire, presently embarked and went over into England. After whose murdering, John L. Darcy Lord chiefe Justice of Ireland, to revenge the Earles death, by advice of all the States of the land assembled in the said Parliament, forthwith with his army took his journy, and by ship arrived at Cragfergus upon the first day of July. Now the people of the country rejoicing at the Lord Justice his comming, and thereby taking heart unto them against the murderers of the said Earle of Ulster, with one assent rose up to revenge the killing of him, and in a pitched field obtained victory: some they tooke prisoners, others they put to the sword. The things thus dispatched, the said Justice with his said army went into Scotland, leaving in his place M. Thomas Burgh Trea∣surer at that time of Ireland. Item, many Nobles of the land and the Earle of Ormond with their retinue and followers assembled together at the house of the Carmelite Friers in Dublin, the 11. day of June: and during this said Parliament, whereas they were going out of the Court yard of the said Friers, sodainly within the presse of the people Murchard or Moris the sonne of Nicolas O-Tothil was there murdered. At whose sodaine killing all the Elders of the land fearing and supposing there was some treason, were strucken with an extraordinary and strange affright, and much troubled. And he that killed the same Murchard stoutly escaped all their hands: but neither the party himselfe nor his name they ever knew. "Also John Lord Darcy returned Justice of Ireland. Item, Sir Walter Bermingham, sonne to the Lord William Bermingham is delive∣red out of the castle of Dublin, in the month of February. More, the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Desmond by a fall off his Palfrey brake his legge. Item, it fell out to be a faire and dry summer, in so much as at the feast of St. Peter advincula bread made of new wheat was eaten, and a peck of wheat was sold for six∣pence in Dublin. Also Sir Reimund Archdekon Knight, and many others of the same kinred, were slaine in Leinster. MCCCXXXVII. In the Vigill of S. Kalixt Pope, seven partridges (and unknown it is what spirit moved them) leaving the plaine field, made way directly unto the City of Dublin, and flying most swiftly over the mercate places, setled on the top of the Brew-house, belonging to the Canons of holy Trinity in Dublin. To which sight some Citizens came running, and wondered much at so strange a prodigie. But the boyes of the city caught two of them alive, a third they killed: and the rest scared therewith mounting up higher took their swift flight and escaped into the fields over against them. Now what this accident (not heard of in the ages before) did portend, I leave to the judgement of those that are cunning and skilfull. Also Sir John Charleton Knight and a Baron, with his wife, sonnes, and daughters, and his whole family, came at the feast of S. Calixtus Pope, as chiefe Justice of Ire∣land: and of his sonnes and houshold some died. Also Lord Thomas Charleton, Bishop of Hereford, & brother in the whole blood unto the said Justice, came the same day with his brother as Chancellour of Ireland, together with Master John Rees Treasurer of Ireland, and Doctor in the Decretals, bringing with them many Welshmen, to the number of two hundred, and arrived in the haven of Dublin. Also whiles John Charleton was Lord Justice and held a Parliament at Dublin, Doctor David O-Hirraghey Archbishop of Ardmagh being called to the Parliament made his provision for housekeeping in the Monastery of S. Mary neere unto Dublin: but because hee would have had his Crosier before him, hee was impeached by the Archbishop and his Clerkes, and permit him they would not. Item, the same yeere died the same David Archbishop of Ardmagh: after whom succeeded Doctor Richard Fitz-Ralfe Deane of Lichfield, a notable Clerke, who was borne in the towne of Dundalke. Item, James Botiller the first Earle of Ormond departed this life the sixth day of January, and lieth buried at Balygaveran. MCCCXXXVIII. Lord Iohn Charleton at the instigation of his whole brother, to wit, Thomas Bishop of Hereford, is by the King discharged of his office, and returneth with his whole houshold into England, and Thomas Bishop of Hereford is by the King ordained Custos and Justice of Ireland. Item, Sir Eustace Pover, and Sir John Pover his Unkle, are by the said Justice brought out of Mounster to Dublin, and committed to prison in the castle the third day of February. Also, in the parts of Ireland the frost was so vehement, that Aven-Liffie, the river of Dublin, was so frozen that very many danced and leaped upon the Ice of the said river, they played at foot-ball, and ran courses there: yea and they made fires of wood and of turfe upon the same Ice, and broyled herrings thereupon. This Ice lasted very many dayes. And as for the snow also in the parts of Ireland that accom∣panied the same frost, a man need not speake any more, seeing it was knowne to lye on such a wonderfull depth. This hard time of weather continued from the second day of December unto the tenth day of February: the like season was never heard of before, especially in Ireland. MCCCXXXIX. All Ireland was generally up in armes. Item, an exceeding great slaughter there was of the Irish, and a number of them drowned, even 1200. at the least, by the meanes of the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Desmond, and the rest of the Geraldines in the parts of Kernige. Item, the Lord Moris Fitz-Nicolas, Lord of Kernige, was apprehended and impri∣soned by the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Desmond, and died in prison, being put to strait diet, for that he openly went out and rebelled with the said Irish against the Lord King of England, and against the Lord Earle. Item, a number of the O. Dymcies and other Irish were killed and drowned in the water of Barrow by the English, and the hot pursuit of the Earle of Kildare. Also a great booty of cattell of sundry sorts, and such a booty as had not been seen in the parts of Leinster, by the said Lord Thomas Bishop of Hereford and Justice of Ireland, and with the helpe of the English of that country, was taken from the Irish in the parts of Odrone in the end of February. MCCCXL. The said Bishop of Hereford and Justice of Ireland, being sent for by the King, returned into England the tenth day of Aprill, leaving in his place Frier Roger Outlaw Priour of Kylmaynon. Also this Sir Roger Lord Priour of Kylmainon, Justice and Chancellour of the said land, died the thirteenth day of Fe∣bruary. Item, the King of England granted by his letters patents unto Iohn Darcy the office of Lord Justice of Ireland for terme of life. MCCCXLI. Sir John Moris Knight came Lord Justice of Ireland in the moneth of May, as Lievtenant unto Iohn Darcy in the foresaid land. Item, this wondrous prodigie following, and such as in our age had not been heard of before, hapned in the county of Leinster : where a certain waifaring man as he tra∣velled in the Kings high way, found a paire of gloves, fit, as he thought, for his owne turne: which as he drew upon his hands, forthwith instead of a mans voice and speech, he kept a strange and marvellous barking like unto a dogge: and from that present, the elder folke and full growne, yea and women too throughout the same county, barked like bigge dogges; but the children and little ones waughed as small whelpes. This plague continued with some 18. daies, with others a whole moneth, and with some for two yeeres. Yea this foresaid contagious malady entred also into the neigh∣bour shires, and forced the people in like manner to barke. Also, the King of England revoked all those gifts and grants that by him or his fa∣ther had bin conferred by any meanes upon any persons whatsoever in Ireland, were they liberties, lands, or other goods: for which revocation great displeasure and dis∣content arose in the land: and so the land of Ireland was at the point to have beene lost for ever out of the King of Englands hand. Item, by the Kings Councell there was ordained a generall Parliament of Ireland in the moneth of October. To the same Parliament Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Desmond came not. Before which time there was never knowne so notable and manifest a division in Ireland, between those that were English by birth, and English in blood. The Maiors besides of the Kings cities in the same land, together with all the better sort of the Nobility and Gentry of the said land, with one consent upon mature deliberation and counsell had, among other their conclusions, decreed and ap∣pointed a common Parliament at Kilkenny in November, to the utility and profit both of the King and the land before named: without asking any counsell at all of the Lord Justice and the Kings officers aforesaid in this behalfe. Now the Lord Justice, and the rest of the Kings Ministers, in no wise presumed to come unto the same Parliament at Kilkenny. The Elders therefore of the land a∣foresaid, together with the Ancients and Maiors of the cities, agreed and ordained as touching solemne Embassadours to be sent with all speed unto the King of England, about relieving the State of the land, and to complaine of his Ministers in Ireland, as touching their unequall and unjust regiment of the same, and that from thenceforth they neither could nor would endure the realme of Ireland to be ruled by his Mini∣sters, as it had wont to be. And particularly they make complaint of the foresaid Mi∣nisters, by way of these Questions. Imprimis, How a land full of warres could be governed by him that was unskilfull in warre? Secondly, how a Minister or Officer of the Kings should in a short time grow to so great wealth? "Thirdly, how it came to passe that the King was never the richer for Ireland? MCCCXLII. The eleventh day of October, when the moone was eleven dayes old, there were seen by many men at Dublin 2. moones in the firmament well and early before day. The one was according to the course of nature in the West, and appea∣red bright: the other to the quantity of a round loafe appeared in the East, casting but a meane and slender light. MCCCXLIII. St. Thomas street in Dublin was casually burnt with fire upon the feast of S. Valentine Martyr. Item, the 13. day of July, the Lord Ralph Ufford, with his wife the Countesse of Ulster, came Lord chiefe Justice of Ireland : Upon whose entring, the faire weather changed sodainly into a distemperature of the aire, and from that time there ensued great store of raine, with such abundance of tempestuous stormes, untill his dying day. None of his predecessours in the times past, was (with griefe be it spoken) com∣parable unto him. For this Justicer bearing the office of Justice-ship, became an op∣pressor of the people of Ireland, a robber of the goods both of Clergy and Laity, of rich and poore alike: a defrauder of many under the colour of doing good: not ob∣serving the rights of the Church, nor keeping the lawes of the kingdome, offering wrongs to the naturall inhabitants, ministring justice to few or none, and altogether distrusting (some few onely excepted) the inborne dwellers in the land. These things did hee still, and attempted the like, misled by the counsell and perswasion of his wife. Item, the said Justice entring into Ulster in the moneth of March through a Pas, called Emerdullan, was fiercely set upon by Mac-Carton, the which Mac-Carton veri∣ly having encountred with the said Justice, spoiled him of his clothes, mony, utensils, silver, plate, and horses, yea and slew some of his men. But in the end, the foresaid Justice with the helpe of the men of Ergale got the victory, and entred into the parts of Ulster. MCCCXLV. The seventh of Iune a common Parliament was holden at Dublin, un∣to which the Lord Moris Fitz Thomas came not. Item, the Lord Ralph Ufford Justice of Ireland, after the feast of S. John Baptist, with the Kings standard raised (yet without the assent of the Elders of the land) a∣gainst the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Desmond, marcheth forthwith into Mounster, and there seized into the Kings hands the Earles lands: and these lands so seized letteth out to farme unto others for a certain yeerly rent, to be carried unto the King. Item, the said Justice being in the parts of Mounster, delivered unto Sir William Burton Knight, two writs: the one whereof the said William should deliver unto the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Kildare: the contents of which was this; That upon paine of forfeiting all his lands, he should with all speed repaire unto him, to aid the King and him with a strong power. Now in the other writ contained it was, that the said Sir William should apprehend the said Earle of Kildare, and so apprehended commit him to prison. But Sir William seeing that this could not possibly be brought about and effected accordingly by himselfe, with colourable words framed for the nonce, perswaded the said Earle, whiles he was preparing himselfe with his army, and levying a power unto the foresaid Justice, that before his departure out of the countrey, hee should repaire unto the Kings Counsell at Dublin, and that by the una∣nimity and joint counsell of the same so deale, as to provide for the safe keeping of his owne lands in his absence: and if after that any hurt should befall unto his lands whiles he was absent, it should be imputed unto the Kings counsell, and not to him. The Earle therefore giving credit unto the Knights words, and thinking of no trea∣cherous practice in this behalfe, disposed and addressed himself to come unto Dublin. When he was come, altogether ignorant of any treachery toward, whiles himselfe sat in consultation with others of the King Councell in the Exchequer-court, sodainly he was by the said Sir William betraied, attached or arrested and apprehended, and brought to the castle of the said city, and there clapt up in prison. Item, the said Justice entred with his army the parts of O. Comill in Mounster, and by a treacherous device taketh two castles of the Earle of Desmonds, to wit, the ca∣stle of Yniskisty, and the castle of the Iland: in which castle of the Iland thus taken, the Knights being within the said castle, namely, Sir Eustacele B re, Sir William Graunt, and Sir Iohn Cotterell, were first drawne, and afterward in October openly hanged untill they were dead. Also the said Earle of Desmond, with some other of his Knights, were by the said Justice banished. The foresaid Justice having attchieved these exploits in Mounster, returned in the moneth of November with his company unto his wife then great with child, remaining at Kilmaynon, which is neere to Dublin: over and beside those things which had beene done against the Laity, by inditing and emprisoning some of them, and turning them out of their goods, he also caused the Ecclesiasticall persons, as well Priests as Clerkes, to be endited; and standing endited, attached and impriso∣ned them, and fetched no small summes of money out of their purses. Item, as touching the grants and demises of their lands, to wit, whom before hee had deprived of their lands, he bestowed the same upon divers tenants (as hath beene said) as also the very writings concerning those grants, so sealed as they were by him and with the Kings seale, he revoked, tooke the same from them, cancelled, defaced, and wholly annulled them. Item, all the mainpernours of the said Earle of Desmond, in number twenty sixe, as well Earles as Barons, Knights and others of the countrey, whose names be these, to wit, Lord William Burke Earle of Ulster, Lord Iames Botiller Earle of Ormond, Sir Richard Tuit Knight, Sir Eustace Le Poer Knight, Sir Gerald De Rochfort Knight, Sir Iohn Fitz-Robert Poer Knight, Sir Robert Barry Knight, Sir Moris Fitz-Gerald Knight, Sir Iohn Wellesley Knight, Sir Walter Lenfaunt Knight, Sir Roger de la Rokell Knight, Sir Henry Traharn Knight, Sir Roger Pover Knight, Sir Iohn Lenfaunt Knight, Sir Roger Pover Knight, Sir Matthew Fitz-Henry Knight, Sir Richard Wallis Knight, Sir Edward Burk Knight, the sonne of the Earle of Ulster, David Barry, William Fitz-Gerald, Fulke Ash, Robert Fitz-Moris, Henry Barkley, Iohn Fitz-George Roch, and Thomas de Lees de Burgh, their own travels and proper expences, which some of them with the said Justice in his warre had beene at, and in pursuing the said Earle of Des∣mond notwithstanding, he by definitive sentence deprived of their lands, and dis-inhe∣rited, and awarded their bodies to the Kings pleasure, excepting foure persons only of all the foresaid sureties, whose names be these, William Burk Earle of Ulster, Iames Botiller Earle of Ormond, &c. MCCCXLVI. Upon Palme-Sunday, which fell out to be the ninth day of Aprill, the above named Lord Ralph Ufford Justice of Ireland went the way of all flesh: for whose death his owne dependants, together with his wife, sorrowed not a little: for whose death also the loiall subjects of Ireland rejoice no lesse. The Clergy and peo∣ple both of the land, for joy of his departure out of this life, with merry hearts doe leap, and celebrate a solemn feast of Easter. At whose death the floods ceased, and the distemperature of the aire had an end, and in one word, the common sort truely and heartily praise the onely Son of God. Well, when this Justice now dead was once fast folded within a sheet and a coffin of lead, the foresaid Countesse (with his trea∣sure not worthy to be bestowed among such holy reliques) in horrible griefe of heart conveied his bowels over into England, there to be enterred. And againe, in the month of May, and on the second day of the same month, behold a prodigious wonder, sent, no doubt, miraculously from God above. For lo, she that before at her comming entred the city of Dublin so gloriously, with the Kings armes and ensignes, attended upon with a number of souldiers in her guard and traine along the streets of the said city, and so from that time forward (a small while though it were) living royally with her friends about her, like a Queen in the Iland of Ireland, now at her going forth of the same city privily by a posternegate of the castle, to a∣void the clamour of the common people calling upon her for debts, in her retire homeward to her owne countrey departed in disgrace, sad and mournfull with the dolefull badges of death, sorrow and heavinesse. Item, after the death of the said Justice of Ireland, the Lord Roger Darcy, with the assent of the Kings Ministers and others of the same land, is placed in the office of Ju∣stice for the time. Also the castles of Ley and Kylmehede are taken by the Irish and burnt, in the mo∣neth of April. Item, Lord Iohn Moris commeth chiefe Justice of Ireland the fifteenth day of May. Also the Irish of Ulster gave a great overthrow unto the English of Urgale, wher∣in were slaine three hundred at the least, in the moneth of June. Also, the said Lord Iohn Moris, Justice of Ireland, is discharged by the King of England from that office of Justiceship, and the Lord Walter Bermingham set in the same office by the fore∣said King: and a little after the foresaid slaughter committed, entreth with Commis∣sion into Ireland in the month of June. Item, unto the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Desmond the maintenance of peace for a certain time is granted by the King of England. Which being granted upon the Vigill of the exaltation of the holy Crosse, hee together with his wife and two sonnes take sea at the haven of Yoghal, and crosseth over into England; where he followeth the law hard, and requireth instantly to have justice for the wrongs done unto him by Raulph Ufford, late Lord Justice of Ireland above named. Item, unto the said Earle, by commandement and order from the Lord King of England, there are granted from his entrance into England twenty shillings a day, and so day by day still is allowed for his expences. Also, the Lord Walter Bermingham Justice of Ireland, and the Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas, Earle of Kildare, rose up in armes against O-Merda and his complices, who burnt the Castle of Ley and Kilmehed: and they with their forces valiantly set upon and invade him and his complices, spoiling, killing and burning, in so much as the said O-Morda and his complices (although at the first they had manfully and resolutely made resistance there with many thousands of the Irish) after many wounds and a great slaughter committed, were constrained in the end to yeeld; and so they sub∣mitted to the Kings grace and mercy, and betake themselves full and whole unto the said Earles devotion. MCCCXLVII. The Earle of Kildare with his Barons and Knights goeth unto the King of England in the moneth of May, to aide him lying then at the siege of Ca∣leys. Also the towne of Caleys was by the inhabitants upon the fourth day of June ren∣dred up into the King of Englands hands. Item, Walter Bonevile, William Calfe, William Welesley, and many other noble Gentlemen and valiant Knights as well of England as of Ireland, died of the sicknesse in Caleys. Also, Mac-Murgh, to wit, Donald Mac-Murgh the sonne of Donald Art Mac-Murgh King of Leinster, upon the fifth day of June is treacherously slain by his own people. More, Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Kildare is by the King of England made Knight. Also the towne called Monaghan, with all the territorie adjoining, is by the Irish burnt on the feast day of S. Stephen Martyr. Item, Dame Joane Fitz-Leoues, sometime wife to the Lord Simon Genevile de∣parted this life, and is buried in the Covent Church of the Friers Preachers of Trim, the second day of Aprill. MCCCXLVIII. And in the 22. yeere of King Edward the third, reigned the first pestilence, and most of all in Ireland, which had begunne afore in other Coun∣tries. Item, in this yeere Walter Lord Bermingham, Lord Justice of Ireland came into England, and left Iohn Archer Prior of Kylmainon his Lievtenant in his roome. And he returneth againe in the same yeere Justice as before: and the King conferred upon the same Walter, the Barony of Kenlys which is in Osserie, because he led a great ar∣my against the Earle of Desmond, with Raulfe Ufford, as before is said: which Baro∣ny belonged in times past unto the Lord Eustace Pover, who was attainted and hang∣ed at the castle of the Isle. MCCCXLIX. Lord Walter Bermingham, the best Justice of Ireland that ever was, gave up his office of Justiceship; after whom succeeded the Lord Carew Knight and Baron both. MCCCL. And in the 25. yeere of the foresaid King Edward, Sir Thomas Rokesby Knight was made Lord Justice of Ireland. Item, Sir Walter Bermingham Knight Lord Bermingham, that right good Justice sometime of Ireland, died in the Even of S. Margaret Virgin in England. MCCCLI. Kenwrick Sherman sometime Maior of the Citie of Dublin died, and was buried under the Belfray of the preaching Friers of the same City: which Belfray and Steeple himselfe erected, and glazed a window at the head of the Quire, and cau∣sed the roofe of the Church to be made, with many more good deeds. In the same Covent he departed I say the sixth day of March: and at his end he made his Will or Testament, amounting to the value of three thousand Marks: and bequeathed many good Legacies unto the Priests of the Church, both religious and secular, that were within twenty miles about the City. MCCCLII. Sir Robert Savage Knight began in Ulster to build new castles in divers places, and upon his owne Manours: who while he was a building said unto his sonne and heire Sir Henry Savage, let us make strong walls about us, lest happily the Irish come and take away our place, destroy our kinred and people, and so we shall be re∣proached of all Nations. Then answered his sonne, where ever there shall be valiant men, there is a Castle and Fortresse too, according to that saying, The sonnes encam∣ped, that is to say, valiant men are ordained for warre, and therefore will I be among such hardy men, and so shall I be in a castle: and therewith said in his vulgar speech, A castle of Bones is better than a castle of Stones. Then his father in a fume and chafe gave over his worke, and swore an oath that he would never build with stone and morter; but keepe a good house, and a very great family and retinew of servants a∣bout him: but he prophesied withall, that hereafter his sonnes and posterity should grieve and waile for it: which indeed came to passe; for the Irish destroyed all that country for default of castles. MCCCLV. And in the thirty yeere of the same King, Sir Thomas Rokesby Knight went out of his office of Justice the sixe and twenty day of July: after whom succee∣ded Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Desmund, and continued in the office untill his death. Item, on the day of Saint Pauls conversion, the same Lord Moris Fitz-Thomas died Justice of Ireland in the castle of Dublin, not without great sorrow of his friends and kinsfolke, and no lesse feare and trembling of all other Irish that loved peace. First, he was buried in the quire of the preaching Friers of Dublin: and at last enter∣red in the Covent Church of the Friers Preachers of Traly. This man was a righte∣ous Justicer, in that hee stucke not to hang up those of his owne blood for theft and rapine, and misdemeanours, even as soone as strangers: and chastised the Irish very well. MCCCLVI. And in the one and thirty yeere of the foresaid King, Sir Thomas Rokesby was made the second time Justice of Ireland, who tamed the Irish very well, and paied as well for the victuals he tooke, saying, I will eat and drinke out of Treen vessels, and yet pay both gold and silver for my food and apparel, yea and for my pen∣sioners about me. The same yeere died that Sir Thomas Justice of Ireland, within the Castle of Kilka. MCCCLVII. Also in the two and thirty yeere of the same Kings raigne, Sir Alma∣rick de Saint Aimund was made chiefe Justice of Ireland, and entred into it. At this very time began a great controversie between Master Richard Fitz-Ralfe Archbishop of Armagh, and the foure Orders of the begging Friers: but in the end the Friers got the mastery, and by the Popes meanes caused the Archbishop of Ar∣magh to hold his peace. MCCCLVIII. In the 33. yeere of the same King Sir Almarick Sir Amund chiefe Justice of Ireland passed over into England. MCCCLIX. In the 34. yeere of the same King, Iames Botiller Earle of Ormond was made chiefe Justice of Ireland. Item, the Lady Ioan Burke Countesse of Kildare departed this life on St. Georges day: and was buried in the Church of the Friers Minors of Kildare, neere unto her husband the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn Earle of Kildare. MCCCLX. And in the 35. of the foresaid King, died Master Richard Fitz-Ralfe Archbishop of Armagh in Hanault, the sixteenth day of December: whose bones were conveied into Ireland by the reverend father Stephen Bishop of Meth, to be be∣stowed in S. Nicolas Church at Dundalk, where he was born: But doubted it is whe∣ther they were his bones or some other mans. Item, Sir Robert Savage, a doughty knight dwelling in Ulster, departed this life: who with a few Englishmen slew of the Irish three thousand neere unto Antrim: but before that he went forth to that battell, he tooke order that there should be given unto every Englishman one good draught or pot of wine or ale, whereof hee had a number of hogsheads and barrels full: and the rest he saved against the comming of his friends: he caused also to be killed sheepe, oxen, tame foule crammed fat, wilde foule, and for venison red Deere: that they might bee dressed and made ready for such as returned winners out of the field, whosoever they were. And he was wont to say, a shame it were if guests should come and not finde what to eate and drinke. But when it pleased God to give the English victorie, he invited them all to supper, and they rejoiced with thanksgiving: and himselfe said, I give God thanks: For better it is thus to keep it, than to let it run forth upon the ground, as some gave me counsell. Buried he was in the covent Church of the preaching Friers of Coulrath, neere to the river of Banne. Also, the Earle of Ormond, Lord Justice of Ireland entred England: in whose place Moris Fitz-Thomas Earle of Kildare was made Lord Justice of Ireland, by this Charter and Commission as appeareth: Omnibus ad quos, &c. that is, To all whom these letters shall come unto Greeting: Know ye that we have committed to our sweet and faithfull subject, Moris Earle of Kildare, the office of our L. Justice of our land of Ireland: and our land of Ireland, with the Castle and all pertenances thereto, to keep and governe so long as it shall please us: and to receive at our Exchequer in Dublin yeerely, so long as hee shall remaine in that office, five hundred pounds: for which he shall keep that office and land, and he shall be himselfe one of the twenty men in armes (whom he shall finde) with as many horses armed continually, during our fore∣said commission. In witnesse whereof, &c. Given by the hands of our beloved in Christ Frier Thomas Burgey, Prior of the Hospitall of S. John of Ierusalem in Ire∣land, our Chancellour of Ireland, at Dublin the thirtieth day of March, and of our reigne the thirty five yeere. Also Iames Botiller Earle of Ormond came again out of England Lord Justice of Ireland, as before, unto whom the Earle of Kildare resigned up the office of Justiceship. MCCCLXI. Leonell Earle of Ulster in right of his wives inheritance, and being the Kings sonne of England, came into Ireland as the Kings Lievtenant, and arrived at Dublin the eighth day of September being the feast of the blessed Virgins nativi∣tie, bringing his second wife Elizabeth, daughter and heire of the Lord William Burke Earle of Ulster. In the same yeere was the second pestilence. There died in England Henry Duke of Lancaster, the Earle of March, the Earle of Northampton. Also on the sixth day of January, Mons Doncref a Citizen of Dublin was buried in the Churchyard of the Friers Preachers of the same City: unto which covent or brotherhood he gave forty pounds, toward the glazing of their Church. Item, there departed out of this life the Lady Ioan Fleming, wife to the Lord Gef∣fery Trevers, and the Lady Margaret Bermingham, wife to the Lord Robert Preston, on the Vigill of St. Margaret, and were buried in the Covent Church of the prea∣ching Friers of Tredagh. Also, the Lord Walter Bermingham the younger, died on S. Laurence day, who divided his inheritance between his sisters, the one part thereof the foresaid Preston had for his share. Item, the foresaid Lord Leonell, after hee was entred into Ireland and had rested some few daies, made warre upon O-Brynne, and proclaimed throughout his army, that no man borne in Ireland should come neere unto his campe: and an hundred of his owne Pensioners were slaine. Leonell seeing this, forthwith reduced the whole people as well of England as of Ireland into one, and so hee prospered, and strucke many battailes round about in all places with the Irish, by the helpe of God, and the people of Ireland. Hee made also many Knights of English and Irish: and among them Robert Preston, Robert Holiwood, Thomas Talbot, Walter Cusacke, Iames de La Hide, Iohn Ash, or de Fraxius, Patricke and Robert Ash, or de Fraxius, and many besides. Also, he removed the Exchequer from Dublin to Carlagh, and gave five hundred pounds to the walling of that towne. Item, on the feast of Saint Maur Abbat, there rose a mighty wind, that shooke and overthrew pinnacles, battlements, chimneys, and other things higher than the rest, trees without number, divers Steeples, and namely, the Steeple of the Preaching Friers. MCCCLXII. Also in the 36. yeere of the same King, the Church of St. Patricke in Dublin through negligence was set on fire and burnt, the eighth of Aprill. MCCCLXIV. And in the 38. yeere of the foresaid King, the Lord Leonel Earle of Ulster entred England the 22. of Aprill, and left his Deputy-Justice of Ireland, the Earle of Ormond: and the same Leonell Duke of Clarence returned the eighth of December. MCCCLXV. Also in the 39. yeere of the said King, the same Leonell Duke of Cla∣rence passed over into England, leaving behind him Sir Thomas Dale Knight his De∣puty-Custos, and Justice of Ireland. MCCCLXVII. Great warre began between the Berminghams of Carbry and the men of Meth, because many robberies by the foresaid were committed in Meth. Then Sir Robert Preston Knight, and Lord chiefe Baron of the Exchequer, set a strong guard in the castle of Carbry, and laid forth a great deale of money against the Kings enemies, to defend his owne right, in regard of his wife. Item, Gerald Fitz-Moris Earle of Desmond was made Lord Justice of Ireland. MCCCLXVIII. And in the 42. yeere of the same King, in Carbry, after a certaine Parliament ended betweene the Irish and English, there were taken prisoners Frier Thomas Burley Prior of Kylmaynon, the Kings Chancellour in Ireland, Iohn Fitz-Reicher Sheriffe of Meth, Sir Robert Tirell Baron of Castle-knoke, with many besides, by the Berminghams and others of Carbry. Then James Bermingham, who had been kept in the castle of Trim in yron manacles and fetters as a traytour, was delivered out of prison, in exchange for the foresaid Chancellour, the other were put to their ransomes. Item, the Church of Saint Maries in Trim was burnt with the fire of the same Mo∣nastery. Also in the Vigill of St. Luke the Evangelist, the Lord Leonell Duke of Clarence died at Albe in Pyemont. First he was buried in the City of Papie, hard by St. Au∣gustin the Doctor; and afterward enterred at Clare in the covent Church of Austin Friers in England. MCCCLXIX. And in the 43. yeere of the foresaid King, Sir William Windesore Knight, a doughty man in armes and courageous, came as the Kings Lievtenant into Ireland the twelfth day of July: unto whom gave place in the office of Justice-ship Gerald Fitz-Moris Earle of Desmond. MCCCLXX. And in the 44. yeere of the same King, began the third pestilence, and the greatest in Ireland, in which died many Noblemen and Gentlemen, Citizens also and children innumerable. The same yeere Gerald Fitz-Moris Earle of Desmond, the Lord Iohn Nicolas and the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn and many other noble persons were taken prisoners up∣on on the sixth of July, neere unto the Monastery of Maio, in the county of Limerick by O-Breen and Mac-Comar of Thomond; and many were slaine: in regard of which occurrent, the said Lievtenant went over to Limericke to the defence of Mounster, leaving the warres against the O-Tothiles, and the rest in Leinster. In this yeere died Lord Robert Terel Baron of castle Knock, the Lady Scolastica his wife, and their sonne and heire: by reason whereof Joan Terel and Maud Terel, sisters of the said Robert, parted the inheritance between themselves. Item, there departed this life Lord Simon Fleming Baron of Slane, Lord John Cu∣sake Baron of Colmolyn ; and Iohn Tailour somtime Maior of Dublin, a rich and migh∣ty monied man. That which followeth was copied out of the Manuscript Chronicles of Henry Marleburgh. MCCCLXXII. Sir Robert Asheton came Lord Justice of Ireland. MCCCLXXIII. Great warring there was between the English of Meth, and O-Fer∣dle, in which warre many of both sides were slaine. Item, in May Lord John Husse Baron of Galtrim, John Fitz Richard Sheriffe of Meth, and William Dalton, in Kynaleagh were killed by the Irish. MCCCLXXV. Thomas Archbishop of Dublin died: and in the same yeere was Ro∣bert of Wickford consecrated Archbishop of Dublin. MCCCLXXXI. There departed this life Edmund Mortimer the Kings Lievtenant in Ireland, Earle of March and Ulster, at Cork. MCCCLXXXIII. There was a great pestilence in Ireland. MCCCLXXXV. The bridge of the city of Dublin fell downe. MCCCXC. Robert Wickford Archbishop of Dublin died. The same yeere Robert Waldebey Archbishop of Dublin, of the order of Austen Friers, was translated. MCCCXCVII. There hapned the translation and death of Frier Richard Northalis Archbishop of Dublin, one of the Carmelites order. Also in the same yeere Thomas Crauley was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin. The same yeere the Lord Thomas Burgh, and the Lord Walter Bermingham slew sixe hundred of the Irish, and their captain Mac-Con. Item, Roger Earle of March, Lievtenant of Ireland wasted the country of O-Bryn, with the help of the Earle of Ormund, and dubbed there seven Knights, to wit, Chri∣stopher Preson, John Bedeleu, Edmund Loundris, John Loundris, William Nugent, Walter de la Hyde, and Robert Cadell, at the forcing and winning of a most strong Manor house of the said O-Bryn. MCCCXCVIII. Upon the Ascension day of our Lord, the Tothils slew forty English, among whom John Fitz-William, Thomas Talbot, and Thomas Comyn were kil∣led, which was a pitifull mishap. In the same yeere on St. Margarets day, Roger Earle of March the Kings Lievte∣nant was with many others slaine at Kenlys in Leinster, O Bryn and other Irish of Leinster, in whose place and office Roger Grey is chosen Justice. In the same yeere upon the feast of S. Marke Pope and Confessor, came to Dublin the noble Duke of Sutherey, as the Kings Lievtenant in Ireland: with whom at the same time arrived Master Thomas Crauley, Archbishop of Dublin. MCCCXCIX. And in the 23. yeere of King Richard, upon Sunday which fell out to be the morrow after S. Fetronill or Pernill the Virgins day, the same glorious King Richard arrived at Waterford with two hundred saile. Item, the sixth day of the same weeke, at Ford in Kenlys within the country of Kil∣ are, were slaine of the Irish 200. by Ie icho and other English: and the morrow af∣ter the Dublinians made a rode in the country of O-Bryn, and slew of the Irish 33. and fourescore men and women with their little children they took prisoners. The same yeere, the said King came to Dublin the fourth day before the Calends of July: where hee heard rumours of Henrie the Duke of Lancaster his comming into England, whereupon himself passed over with speed into England. MCCCC. In the first yeere of King Henry the fourth, at Whitsontide the Constable of Dublin castle and many others encountred the Scots at sea before Stranford in Ulster: whereupon fell out a lamentable accident, for that many of the English were slaine and drowned there. MCCCCI. In the second yeere of King Henry the fourth, Sir John Stanley the K. Lievtenant passed over into England in the month of May, leaving in his roome Sir William Stanley. In the same yeere, upon the Vigill of Saint Bartholomew, there entred into Ireland Stephen Scroop, as deputy to the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the Kings Lievtenant in Ireland. The same yeere, on the day of S. Brice Bishop and Confessor, the Lord Thomas of Lancaster the Kings sonne, arrived at Dublin, Lievtenant of Ireland. MCCCCII. On the fifth of July was the Church of the Friers Preachers at Dublin dedicated by the Archbishop of Dublin: and the same day John Drake the Maior of Dublin, with the citizens and men of the countrey, slew in battell of the Irish neere unto Bree 493. and were victorious over the Irish. The same yeere in the moneth of September, a Parliament was holden at Dublin: at which time in Uriel Sir Bartholomew Verdon, James White, Stephen Gernon, and their complices, slew John Dowdal Sheriffe of Louth. MCCCCIII. In the fourth yeere of King Henry the fourth, and in the moneth of May, was killed Sir Walter Beterley a valiant Knight then Sheriffe there, and with him thirty men. In the same yeere about the feast of S. Martin, there passed over into England Tho∣mas the Kings sonne, leaving Stephen Scroop his Deputy, who also himself upon the first day of Lent returned into England: and then the Lords of the land chose the Earle of Ormond Lord Justice of Ireland. MCCCCIV. In the fifth yeere of King Henry died Iohn Cowlton Archbishop of Armagh the fifth of May, whom Nicholas Fleming succeeded. The same yeere on S. Vitalis day began a Parliament at Dublin, before the Earle of Ormond then Lord Justice of Ireland: wherein where confirmed the Statutes of Kilkenny and of Dub∣lin: also the charter of Ireland. In the same yeere Patrick Savage in Ulster was treacherously slaine by Mac-Kil∣mori ; and Richard his brother given for an hostage, who likewise was murdred in pri∣son, after he had payed two hundred Marks. MCCCCV. In the sixth yeere of King Henry, and in the month of May, were taken three Scottish Galions or Barkes, two at Green-castle, and one at Dalkey, with the captaine Thomas Mac-Golagh. The same yeere the merchants of Tredaght entred Scotland, tooke pledges and preies. The same yeere Stephen Scroope crossed the seas into England, leaving the Earle of Ormond Lord Justice of Ireland. And the same yeere, in the month of June the Dublinians entred Scotland at Saint Ninians, and there behaved themselves manfully: then landed they in Wales, and did much hurt to the Welshmen there; yea and carried away the Shrine of S. Cubie unto the Church of the holy Trinitie in Dublin. Also, the same yeere on the Vigill of the blessed Virgin, died James Botiller Earle of Ormond, whiles he was Lord Justice (to the griefe of many) at Baligauran; unto whom there succeeded in the office of Lord Justice, Gerald Earle of Kildare. MCCCCVI. And in the seventh yeere of King Henry, on Corpus Christi day the Dub∣linians with the people of the Countrey about them, manfully overcame the Irish, and killed some of them: they tooke three ensignes, and carried away divers of their heads to Dublin. The same yeere, the Prior of Conall fought valiantly in the plaine of Kildare, and vanquished two hundred Irish well armed, killing some, and putting others to flight: there were in the Priors company not above twenty English: and thus God regardeth those that repose trust in him. In the same yeere, after the feast of S. Michael, Sir Stephen Scroop Deputy Justice under the Lord Thomas the Kings sonne Lievtenant of Ireland, entred into Ireland. The same yeere died Pope Innocentius the seventh, after whom succeeded Pope Gregory. The same yeere beganne a Parliament at Dublin on Saint Hilaries day, which ended at Trym in Lent: and Meiler Bermingham slew Cathol O-Conghir in the end of February, and Sir Gefferey Vaulx a noble Knight in the countie of Carlagh died. MCCCCVII. A certaine Irishman, a most false villaine, named Mac-Adam Mac-Gilmori (who caused fortie Churches to be destroied) one that was never christened, and therefore termed Corbi, tooke Patricke Savage prisoner, and received of him for his ransome two thousand Marks, and yet killed him afterwards with his brother Ri∣chard. The same yeere, in the feast of the exaltation of the Holy Crosse, Stephen Scroop, Deputy under Thomas the Kings sonne Lievtenant of Ireland, accompanied with the Earles of Ormond and Desmond, and the Prior of Kylmaynon, with many out of Meth, set forth from Dublin : and in hostile manner invaded the land of Mac-Murgh: where the Irish had the better of the field in the forepart of the day; but af∣terwards they were manfully by the said Captaines repulsed: where O-Nolam with his sonne and others were taken prisoners. But hearing then and there, that the Burkeins and O-Keroll in the countie of Kilkenny had for two daies together done much mischiefe, sodainly the said Captaines rode in all haste with bridle on horse necke unto the towne of Callan, and there meeting with the said enemies, manfully put them to flight. O-Keroll, and to the number of eight hundred they killed in the place. The same yeere Stephen Scroop sailed over into England, and Iames Butler Earle of Ormond was by the country chosen Lord Justice of Ireland. MCCCCVIII. The said L. Justice held a Parliament at Dublin, in which Parliament were confirmed the Statutes of Kilkenny and of Dublin: and a Charter granted un∣der the great seale of England against Purveyouris. The same yeere, the morrow after S. Peters day ad Vincula, the Lord Thomas of Lancaster the Kings sonne arrived as Lievtenant of Ireland at Cartingford, and in the weeke following came to Dublin: and arrested the Earle of Kildare as he came unto him, with three of his house: and all his goods he lost by the servants of the said Liev∣tenant: and in the castle of Dublin he imprisoned him, untill he made paiment of 300. Marks for a fine. The same yeere on Saint Marcellus day died the Lord Stephen Scroop at Tristel-Dermot ." The same yeere the said Thomas of Lancaster was wounded at Kylmainon, and hardly escaped death: and afterwards caused Proclamation to be made, that whoso∣ever by his tenures owed service to the King should appeare at Rosse. And after Saint Hilaries feast he held a Parliament at Kilkenny, for to have a tallage granted. And af∣terwards upon the third day before the Ides of March, he passed over into England, leaving the Prior of Kylmainon his Deputy in Ireland. In this yeere Hugh Mac-Gilmory was slaine at Cragfergus, within the Oratory or Church of the Friers Minors: which Church he before had destroyed, and broken the glasse windowes thereof, for to have the iron barres therein: at which his ene∣mies, to wit, the Savages, entred. MCCCCIX. In the tenth yeere of King Henry, and in the month of June, Ianico of Artoys with the English slew fourescore of the Irish in Ulster. MCCCCX. On the thirteenth day of June began a Parliament at Dublin, and conti∣nued three weeks, the Prior of Kylmainon sitting as Lord Justice. The same yeere, on the tenth day of July, the same Justice beganne the castle of Mibracly in O-Feroll, and built De la Mare: and a great dearth there was of corne. In the same yeere the Justice entred the land of O-brin with a thousand and five hundred kernes, of whom eight hundred departed unto the Irish: and had not the Dublinians beene there, there would have beene wailing and many a woe; and yet Iohn Derpatrick lost his life there. MCCCCXII. About the feast of Tiburce and Valerian, O-Conghir did much harm to the Irish in Meth, and tooke prisoner 160. men. The same yeere O-Doles a knight, and Thomas Fitz-Moris Sheriffe of Limerik, killed one another. In the same yeere, the ninth of June, died Robert Monteyn Bishop of Meth, after whom succeeded Edward Dandisey sometime Archdeacon of Cornwall. MCCCCXIII. The seventh of October there landed in Ireland at Cloncarfe, Iohn Stanley the Kings Lievtenant in Ireland, who died the sixth of January in Atterith. The same yeere, after the death of Iohn Stanley Lord Lievtenant, Thomas Crauley Archbishop of Dublin was chosen on the eleventh day of February Lord Justice of Ireland. A Parliament eftsoons began at Dublin the morrow after Saint Matthias the Apostles day, and lasted fifteene daies: during which time the Irish fell to burning in divers places, as they had done often in Parliament times; wherefore a tallage was demanded, but not granted. MCCCCXIIII. The English slew of the Irish the O-Mordries and O-Dempsies neer to Kilka, even whiles the Justice of Ireland Thomas Crauley Archbishop of Dub∣lin went in Procession at Tristeldermot, praying with his Clerks: and his servants with their countrimen overthrew of the Irish an hundred. Upon the feast day of Saint Gordian and Saint Epimachus a foile or discomfiture was given to the English of Meth, and there was slaine Thomas Maurevord Baron of Scrin: and taken prisoners there were Christopher Fleming, Iohn Dardis, and many o∣thers slaine by O-Conghir and the Irish. In the vigill of Saint Martin arrived the Lord Iohn Talbot Lord Furnivall, as Lievtenant of Ireland, at Dalkay. MCCCCXV. In the moneth of November died Robert Talbot a Nobleman, who walled the Suburbs of Kilkenny. Item, after the feast of All-Saints died Frier Patricke Baret Bishop of Ferne, and a Canon of Kenlis, where he was buried. MCCCCXVI. On the feast day of Gervasse and Prothasius the Lord Furnivall had a sonne borne at Finglas. About this time the reverend Lord Stephen Fleming Archbishop of Armagh departed this life: unto whom succeeded Iohn Suanig. And at the same time the Lord Bishop of Ardachard, Frier Adam Lyns of the order of preaching Friers. Item, on Saint Laurence day died Thomas Talbot Lord of Furnivall, lately borne at Finglas, & is interred in the quire of the preaching Friers Church of Dublin, with∣in the Covent of the said Preachers. A Parliament was holden at Dublin, in the time whereof the Irish fell upon the English and slew many of them, among whom Tho∣mas Balimore of Baliquelan was slaine. This Parliament lasted in that place sixe weekes, and then was removed to Trym the eleventh day of May, and there it continued eleven daies: and granted there was unto the Lievtenant a subsidy of foure hundred Markes. MCCCCXVII. On the Eve of Philip and Iacob Apostles, Thomas Crauley Arch∣bishop of Dublin passed over into England, and died at Farindon: he was buried in the New Colledge at Oxford: a liberall man he had beene, and an almes-giver, a great Clerke, a Doctor in Divinity, and excellent Preacher, a builder of the places wherein he dwelt, beautifull, sumptuous, of sanguine complexion, and tall of stature: so that in his time it might well be said unto him, Faire art thou, and of a goodly pre∣sence above the sons of men, grace is seated all over thy lips for the eloquence of thy tongue. Fourescore yeeres old he was, and for the space almost of twenty yeeres he governed the Church of Dublin peaceably. MCCCCXVIII. The feast of the Annuntiation of our Lady fell out to be on good Friday, and straight after Easter the Lord Deputy spoiled the tenants of Henry Crus and Henry Bethat. Item, at Slane on the day of S. John and S. Paul, were arrested the Earle of Kildare, Sir Christopher Preston, and Sir John Bedleu, and committed to ward within the ca∣stle of Trym, because they were desirous to common with the Prior of Kylmainon. The fourth of August died Sir Matthew Husee Baron of Galtrim, who lieth buried at the Preaching Friers in Trim. MCCCCXIX. The eleventh of May, Edmund Brel sometime Maior of Dublin de∣parted this life, and was buried at the Friers preachers of the same Citie. A Counsell royall was holden at Naas: and there a subsidie of 300. Markes was granted to the Lord Lievtenant. At the same time died Sir Iohn Loundres. On the fifth day of the week, falling out to be Maunday Thursday, O-Thoill tooke 400. kine that belonged to Balimore, so breaking the peace against his oath. The fourth of May Mac-Morghe chiefe Captaine of his owne Sept, and of all the Irish in Leinster, was taken prisoner. And the same day Hugh Cokesey was made knight. The last day of May, the Lievtenant, the Archbishop of Dublin, and the Maior to∣gether rased the castle of Kenini. The morrow after the feast of Processus and Martinian, the Lord William Burgh, and other of the English slew 500. of the Irish, and tooke O-Kelly priso∣ner. On the feast of Mary Magdalen, the Lievtenant John Talbot passed over into England, leaving for his Deputy the Archbishop of Dublin: carrying with him the curses of divers, for that he paid a little or nothing for his victuals, and was indebted unto many. About the feast of Saint Laurence, divers there were that died in Normandy, and by name, Frier Thomas Botiller Prior of Kilmainon, with many others. After whom succeeded in the Priory Frier John Fitz-Henry. The Archbishop being Deputy fell upon the Scohies, and slew of the Irish thirty neere unto Rodi∣ston. Item, upon the Ides of February died Frier John Fitz-Henry Prior of Kylmainon: whom succeeded Frier William Fitz-Thomas, elected and confirmed the morrow af∣ter S. Valentines day. Also the morrow after the feast of Saint Peter in Cathedra, the Lord Iohn Talbot Lord of Furnivall yeelded the place into the hands of the Lord Richard Talbot Arch∣bishop of Dublin, who afterward was chosen Lord Justice of Ireland. MCCCCXX. Upon the fourth day of Aprill, the Lord Iames Butler Earle of Ormond arrived at Waterford, Lievtenant of Ireland, and quickely caused a combat to bee fought between two of his cousins: of whom the one died in the field, and the other was carried forth of the place sore hurt and lamed unto Kilkenny. On St. Georges feast day, the same Lievtenant held a Counsell at Dublin, and summoned a Parliament there. And in the meane while he raised great booties from O-Raly, Mac-Mahon, and Mac-Guyr: And the eighth day of June began a Parliament at Dublin, and there were granted unto the Lievtenant 700. Markes: and that Parliament continued for 16. dayes: and the same was prorogued unto the munday after St. Andrewes day: also in the foresaid Parliament were cast up the debts of the Lord Iohn Talbot late Lievtenant, which arose to a great summe. Also the morrow after St. Michaels day died Michaell Bodley. " On the Vigill of Saint Francis, there departed this life Frier Nicholas Talbot, Ab∣bot of St. Thomas the Martyr in Dublin. After whom succeeded Frier John Whi∣ting. The morrow after the Apostles Simon and Iudes day, was the castle of Colnolin ta∣ken by Thomas Fitz-Geffery. Also in the Vigill of S. Katherine Virgin, Botiller the sonne and heire of the Earle of Ormund was borne. Item, on munday after the feast of S. Andrew the Apostle, the said Parliament began at Dublin, and continued 13. daies: and granted there was to the Lievtenant there 300. markes: and the Parliament was adjourned eftsoones unto the munday after St. Ambrose day. Then rumours resounded, that the Lord Thomas Fitz-Iohn Earle of Desmund died at Paris on St. Laurence feast day, and was buried there at the Friers Preachers co∣vent, the King of England being present at his funerals. After whom succeeded in that Seigniorie James Fitz-Gerald his Unkle by the fathers side, who had three times thrust him out of his patrimonie: and laid an imputation upon him that he was a prodigall spend-thrift, and had wasted his patrimony both in Ireland and England, and that he gave or would give lands to the Abbey of St. Iames at Kernisham. 1421. The Parliament began upon prorogation the third time at Dublin the munday after the feast of S. Ambrose: and there certain persons were ordained to be sent in message to the King, as touching the redresse of the land, namely, the Archbishop of Armagh, and Sir Christopher Preston Knight. At the same time Richard O-Hedian Bishop of Cassell was accused by John Gese Bishop of Lismore and Waterford, upon thirtie Articles laid to his charge. After all that, hee charged him that hee made very much of the Irish, and loved none of the English: that hee bestowed no benefice upon any Englishman, and gave order like∣wise unto other Bishops, that they should not conferre the least living that was upon them. Item, that hee counterfeited the King of Englands seale, and the Kings letters pa∣tents, that he went about to make himselfe King of Mounster: also that he tooke a ring away from the image of S. Patrick, which the Earle of Desmund had offered, and bestowed it upon an harlot of his: beside many other enormities, which he exhibi∣ted in writing. And the Lords and Commons were much troubled betweene these twaine. Now in the same Parliament, there was debate between Adam Pay Bishop of Clon and another Prelate: for that the said Adam went about to unite the others Church unto his, but the other would not: and so they were sent and referred unto the Court of Rome, and this Parliament lasted 18. daies. In the Nones of May there was a slaughter committed by O-Mordris upon the fa∣mily or retinue of the Earle of Ormund, Lievtenant, neere unto the Monastery of Leys, where were slaine of the English 27. The principall parties were Purcell and Grant. Then Gentlemen of good birth were taken prisoners, and 200. fled unto the foresaid Monastery, and so were saved. In the Ides of May died Sir Iohn Bodley Knight, and Geffery Galon sometime Maior of Dublin, and was buried in the house of the preaching Friers of the same City. About this time Mac-Mahon an Irishman played the divell in Urgal, wasting and burning where ever he went. The seventh of Iune the Lievtenant entred into the country, to wit, of Leys against O-Mordis, and led thither a most puissant army, having the killing of his enemies for foure daies together, and untill the Irish promised all peace and quietnesse. Upon the feast of Michael the Archangel, Thomas Stanley, accompanied with all the Knights and Squires of Meth and Iriel, took Moyle O-Downyll prisoner, and slew others, in the 14. yeere of King Henry the sixth his reigne. Thus far forth were continued the Annales of Ireland which came to my hands, and upon which I have bestowed these few pages, to gratifie them that may delight therein. As for the nice and dainty readers, who would have all writings tried to the touch of Augustus his dayes, I know they can yeeld no pleasing rellish to them, in regard of the harsh words, and the saplesse dry stile, familiar unto that age wherein they were penned. Never∣thelesse, I would have those to remember, That HISTORIE both beareth, brooketh, and requireth the Authors of all ages: Also, That they are to look as well for reall and sub∣stantiall knowledge from some, as for the verball and lite∣rall learning from others. THE SMALLER ILANDS IN THE BRITISH OCEAN. N Ow will I at length waigh anchor and set saile out of Ireland, and lanching forth take survey of the Ilands scattered here and there along the coasts of Britaine. If I durst repose any trust in my selfe, or if I were of any sufficiencie, I would shape my course to every one. But sith it is my purpose to discover and in∣lighten Antiquity, such as are obscure and of lesse account I will lightly coast by: and those that carry any ancient name and reckoning above the rest, I will enter and visite, yea and make some short stay in them, that now at last in a good and happy houre they may recover their ancienty againe. And that in this voiage I may at first set out orderly, and take a straight and direct course, I will, to begin, saile out of Ireland into the Severn sea, and by the Irish sea (after I have doubled the utmost point of Scotland) follow my course down into the Germai Ocean, and so from thence through the British sea (which extendeth as far as to Spaine) hold on my race as prosperously as I can. But I am afraid lest this my ship of Antiquity, steared by me so unskilfull a Pilot, either run and be split upon the rockes of errours, or else be overwhelmed with the waves of ignorance, yet venter I must. , saith Antiphilus, , that is, Adventure is a good sea Captain: and he that saileth the same voiage a second time, may haply speed much better, and finish his desired course. First and formost, because it seemeth not impertinent to my matter, I will set down what Plutarch, out of a fabulous narration of Demetrius (who seemeth to have lived in Hadrians time) reporteth generally as touching the Ilands lying neer to Britain. De∣metrius made report, that most of those Ilands which coast upon Britain, lie desert, deso∣late and scattering here and there; whereof somewere dedicated to the Daemones, and Heroes: also that himself by commission from the Emperour, sailed toward one that was neerest of those desert Iles, for to know and discover somewhat: the which he found to have in a few inhabitants, and those he understood were reputed by the Britans sacred and in∣violable. Within a while after he was landed there, the aire and weather (as he said) be∣came foully troubled, many portenteous signes were given by terrible tempests, with extra-ordinary stormes, flashing and violent lightnings and fiery impressions: which after they were appeased, the Ilanders certified him that some one of great eminency was dead. And a little after: Now he said moreover, that there was a certain Iland there, wherein Saturn was by Briareus closed up and kept in prison sound asleep (for sleep was the means to hold him captive) about whose person there were many Daemones at his feet, that stood atten∣ding as servitours. Thus they took pleasure in old time, as now also at this day, bold∣ly to devise strange wonders and tales of places far remote, in a certain secure veine of lying, as it were by authoritie. In the narrow sea of Severn there peep up first of all two small Ilands, whereof the one, because it lieth flat and with an even ground, is by us called Flatholme, in the same sense that Planarie is named Italy: the other Step-holme, because it riseth steep, in the British tongue Reoric: both of them, when the Britans bare rule, were tear∣med Echni, like as in our age Holmes, for so the Anglo-Saxons called greene plaines enclosed within water: neither were they in ancient times famous for any thing else, but for that the Danes lay there at road: and for the tomb of one Gualchus, a Britan of singular devoutnesse, whose Disciple Barruch left his name to the Iland Barry in Wales (as an ancient monument of the Church of Landaff witnesseth) which Iland in like manner hath given name to a noble house of the Barraies in Ireland. This hath lying hard to it the little Iland Silly, upon the coast of the ancient Silu∣res, of whose name it seemeth to retaine still more than a shadow, like as a small town over against it in Glancorgan-shire: yet dare I not avouch it to be Silura, or Insula Silurum, the Iland that Solinus mentioneth, seeing there be other Ilands bearing the same name; yet, farre distant from the Silures. From thence we come to Caldey, in the British Imis-Pix, lying neer unto the shore; and to Londey farther within the sea, over against Caldey, & belonging unto Devon∣shire ; from the promontory or cape whereof, named Hert-nesse, it lieth 14. miles. Lar∣ger this is counted of the twaine, howbeit reported to bee not much more than two miles long, and one mile broad, so encircled with rockes and cliffes round about, that there is no avenue unto it but in one or two places. A fort or sconce it had: the ruines whereof, like as of S. Helens Chappell, are yet to be seene. That it had beene in time past eared with the plough, the ridges and furrowes in it doe evidently shew: now all the commodity and profit that it yeeldeth doth arise from sea-fowle, whereof it hath great store. Trees it hath none but stinking Elders, which the Stares haunt in such multitudes, that uneth for their dung there is any comming unto them. But what meane I to stand hereupon? considering that Sir Thomas Delamere Knight (in re∣porting how that silly king Edward the second, when his froward and unreasonable wife, together with the unruly Barons thundred out threats, and denounced terrible menaces, was minded to withdraw himselfe hither, as to a place of refuge) hath in old time described it in this wise. Londay (saith he) is an Iland lying in the mouth of Severn two miles long over way, full of pleasant pastures: it affoordeth Connies in great store: doves and stares (which Alexander Necham tearmeth Ganimedes birds) it hath conti∣nually from time to time ready to lay: it serveth the inhabitants besides, with fresh water, walming abundantly out of springs, though it selfe be on all sides compassed with the sea. One way of entrance it hath into it, wherein two men can hardly goe afront together on foot; on every part besides the dreadfull rockes bearing out a mighty heighth, hinder all ingresse. But scarcely doe our Historians make any mention of it, save only how William de Marisco, a most leud and mischievous rover in the reign of king Henry the third, from hence sore infested these coasts in times past: and that in King Edward the third his daies it was part of the Lutterels inheritance. From thence in the very bent and turning of Pembroch-shire, we meet with Gre∣sholme, Stockholme, Gresholme. Stockholme, and Scalmey. Silimnus. and Scalmey, in which is plentie of grasse, and wild thyme grow∣eth very fresh and pleasant. The day was when I thought Scalmey to have been that SILIMNUS, which Plinie in old time wrote of: but the truth hath now made me change my opinion. For that SILIMNUS of Pliny (as the affinity of the word implieth, seemes to be Ptolomee his LIMNI. That this here is the Britans Lymen, the word it selfe (if I should say nothing) sheweth evidently, which the Englishmen by a new name have now a daies termed Ramsey. This lieth full against the Epis∣copall Sea of Saint Davids, whereunto it belongeth, and was in the foregoing ages very famous for the death of one Iustinian a most holy man; who after he had with∣drawne himselfe hither out of little Britaine in France, in that age that brought forth so many Saints, and led a long time an Eremits life, wholly devoted to the ser∣vice of God, being in the end slaine by a page, was registred in the roll of Martyrs. In whose life we finde it oftentimes written, Lemen ia Insula. Which denomination verily, together with the British name Limen, by which name it is knowne unto the Britains themselves, checketh and taxeth his drowsinesse who maketh this Iland ly∣ing next above it to be Ptolomees Limnon: which the Britains now name Enhly, and English Berdsey, as one would say the Isle of Birds. But that this should be it that Ptolomee calleth EDRI, and Plinie ANDROS or ADROS (as it is in some place read) I durst more boldly ghesse by the signification of the word: for Ader in the British tongue signifieth a Bird, and in the very same sense the Englishmen afterward called it Berdsey. As for Enhly, it is a name of a later stampe, and came by occasion of a cer∣taine holy and devout man, who here lived as an Eremite. For this Iland, which toward the East mounteth aloft with an high promontory, but Westward lieth plaine, and is of a fertile mould, harboured in old time so many holy men, that beside Dubrith and Merlin the Caledonian, ancient histories record there were twenty thousand Saints buried here. Next unto this lieth MONA, that is, Anglesey, which the Britans also name Mon, Tir-Mon, and Ynis Dowyll, that is, A darke or shady Iland, the Saxons , whereof I have treated already in the page 671. To Mone or Anglesey there adjoine three smaller Ilands, Moyl-Rhoniad, that is, The Isle of Seales, upon the North-west; which after it had beene with-held by cer∣taine that unjustly seized upon it, from the Bishops of Bangor, unto whom it belon∣ged, Henry Deney Bishop of Bangor (as we reade in the history of Canterbury) with a fleet manned with souldiers in King Henry the seventh his time, recovered. Eastward lieth Ynis Ligod, that is, The Isle of mice: and more beneath, Prest-home, that is, The Isle of Priests: and nothing saw we in it but the tower steeple of Saint Cyriacs chap∣pell, which sheweth it selfe to the beholders afarre off. Incredible it is what the neighbours report of the infinite multitude of sea fowle that here doe breed: as also what they tell of a causey or banke which went from hence through the sea to the foot of that huge mountaine Pen-Maen-Maur, for their use who of devotion went on pilgrimage to visit this place, held in times past so holy and religious. I passe over Lambey a little Iland opposite unto this toward the coast of Ireland, although our Metall-men have to their great charges sought there of late for Alum. More Northward lieth that Mona whereof Caesar maketh mention, in the mids of the cur, as he saith, betweene Britaine and Ireland. Ptolomee termeth it MONOEDA, as one would say Mon-eitha, that is, if I may be allowed to conjecture, The more remote Mona, to put a difference betweene it and the other Mona, that is, Anglesey: Plinie MONABIA, Orosius MENAVIA, and Bede Menavia secunda, that is, the second Menavia, where he termeth Mona or Angle∣sey, Menavia prior, that is, the former Menavia, and calleth them both, Ilands of the Britans: in which writers notwithstanding it is read amisse Mevania: Ninius who also goeth abroad under the name of Gildas, nameth it Eubonia and Manaw, the Britans Menow, the inhabitants Maning, and we Englishmen, The Yle of Man : stret∣ched out just in the mid levell (as saith Girald Cambrensis ) betweene the Northren coasts of Ireland and Britaine; about which Isle, and namely to whether of the two countries it ought of right to appertaine, there arose no small doubt among those in ancient times. At length the controversie was taken up in this manner. For as much as this land fostered venemous wormes brought over hither for triall, adjudged it was by a common censure and doome to lye unto Britain. Howbeit the inhabitants both in language and manners come nighest unto the Irish, yet so as they therewith savour somewhat of the qualities of the Norvegians. It lieth out in length from North to South much about thirty Italian miles: but reacheth in bredth where it is widest, scarce above fifteene miles, and where it is nar∣rowest eight. In Bedes dayes it contained in it three hundred families, like as Angle∣sey 96. but now it numbreth seventeene Parish Churches. Flaxe and hempe it bea∣reth abundantly: it hath fresh pastures, and fields by good manuring plenteous of Barley, and Wheat, but of Oates especially: whence it is that the people there eate most of all Oaten bread. Store of cattell every where, and mighty flockes of sheepe: but both their sheepe and other cattell also bee smaller of body there, like as in Ireland neighbouring upon it, than in England, and nothing so faire headed. And considering it hath few or no woods at all, they use for fewell a kind of clammy turfe, which as they are digging out of the earth, they light many times upon trees buried under the ground. In the middest it riseth up with hils standing thick, the highest whereof is Sceafull, from whence a man may see on a cleere and faire day, Scotland, England and Ireland. Their chiefe towne they count Russin, situate on the South-side, which of a castle wherein lieth a Garison, is commonly called Castle-Towne: where, within a little Iland Pope Gregory the fourteenth instituted an Episcopall See: the Bishop where∣of named Sodorensis (of this very Iland as it is thought) had jurisdiction in times past over all the Ilands, West Irish Iles or Hebrides, but exerciseth it now onely upon that Iland, and is himselfe under the Archbishop of Yorke. Howbeit, he hath no place nor voice in the assembly of the States of England in Court of Parliament. Duglasse is the best peopled towne, and of greatest resort; because the haven is commodious, and hath a most easie entrance: unto which the Frenchmen and other forrainers use to repaire with their bay-salt, having trafficke with the Ilanders, and buying of them againe, leather, course wooll, and poudred beefe. But on the South side of the Ile stand Bala-Curi (where the Bishop for the most part is resiant) and the Pyle, a Block-house standing in a little Iland; where also there are souldiers in garison. Also before the very South point there lyeth a prety Iland, called the Calfe of Man, wherein are exceeding great store of sea-foule called Puffins, and of those duckes and drakes which (breeding of rotten-wood, as they say) the Eng∣lishmen call Bernacles, Bernacles. the Scots Clakes and Soland geese. That which here followeth I will set downe out of a letter, which that learned and reverend father in God John Meryk Bishop of this Ile wrote unto me. This Iland, for cattell, for fish, yea and for corne, rather through mens industry than by any goodnesse of the ground, hath not only sufficient for it selfe, but also good store to send into other coun∣tries. Yet happier it was for the government thereof, as being defended from neighbour enemies by souldiers prest and ready, at the expences of the Earle of Darby, upon which he employed the greatest part of his yeerely revenue in this Isle. All controversies are de∣cided without writings or any charges, by certaine Iudges, whom they chuse from among themselves, and call Deemsters. For the Magistrate taketh up a stone, and when he hath given it his mark, delivereth it unto the plaintiffe, who by vertue thereof citeth his adver∣sary and witnesses. If there fall out any doubtfull case & of greater importance, it is refer∣red to twelve men, whom they terme, The Keyes of the Iland. It hath certain Coroners, and those they call Annos, who stand in stead of Sheriffes, and execute their office. The Ecclesiasticall Judge doth cite persons and determine causes, within eight dayes they stand to his award, or they are clapt up in prison. They had, as I have heard say, as a peculiar language of their own, so also their peculi∣ar lawes, which are signes of a peculiar seigniory. Their Ecclesiasticall lawes, next after this Canon Law, come neerest unto the Civill. Upon any Iudge or Clerks of the Court for making of Processe or drawing Instruments, the people never bestow so much as one penny. As for that which English Writers report of mischiefes done by witchcraft and sorcery, it is meere false. They that are of the wealthier sort and hold faire possessions, and for their good houskeeping, and honest cariage, are conformable to imitate the people of Lancaster. The women whither soever they go out of their doores, gird themselves about (as mindfull of their mortality) with the winding sheet that they purpose to be buried in. Such of them as are by law condemned to die, are sewed within a sack, & flung from a rock into the sea. They are all of them in this Isle as far from the customary practice of theeving or begging from doore to doore, as may be: wonderfull religious, and most ready every one to entertain the forme of the English Church. The disorders, as well Civill as Ecclesiasticall, of their neighbour nations they detest: and whereas the whole Isle is divided into two parts, South and North; this in common speech resembleth the Scottish, the other the Irish. Haply it were worth my labour, if I should here insert a little History of this Iland, which truth of due demandeth at my hands, that so I may keepe alive and in remem∣brance still, the Acts heretofore atchieved: which if they bee not buried, yet are waxen old, and have as it were one foot in the grave of oblivion. That the Britans held this Iland, as they did all Britaine, it is confessed by all. But when the Nations from the North, like violent tempests, overflowed these South parts, it became sub∣ject to the Scots. For under the Emperours Honorius and Arcadius (as wee read in Orosius ) it was inhabited as well as Ireland by the Scottish Nations: and Ninnius hath written that one Biule a Scot was Lord of it. But (as the same writer recordeth) the Scots were driven out of all the British countries and Ilands by Cuneda, Grandfa∣ther of Maglocunus, whom Gildas (for the foule work that he made in these Ilands) tearmed the Dragon of the Iles. After this, Edwin King of Northumberland brought this Iland, like as the foresaid Anglesey, under the subjection of the English, if we un∣derstand them both by the name of Menaviae, as writers perswade us: at which time it was reckoned an Iland of the Britans. But when the North had sent abroad his brood the second time, I meane the Normans, Danes, and Norwegians: these Nor∣wegians, who with their manifold robberies and roveries did most hurt from the Northren sea, tooke up their haunt into this Iland and the Hebrides, and therein ere∣cted Lords and Petty Kings, whose briefe history I will here put downe word for word out of an old Manuscript, lest it should be utterly lost, which is intituled, The Chronicle of Man, seeming to have been written by the Monks of the Abbey of Rus∣sin, which was the principall place of religion in this Isle. A CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF MAN. A Nno Domini MLXV. Edward of blessed memory King of England departed this life: after whom succeeded in the kingdome Harald the son of Godwin ; against whom Harald Harfager King of Nor∣way came into the field, and fought a battell at Stainford-bridge ; and the English obtaining the victory, put them all to flight: out of which chace Godred surnamed Crovan, the son of Harald the black of Iseland, came unto Godred the sonne of Syrric, who then reigned in Man, and by him was honourably received. The same yeere, William the BASTARD conquered England and Godred the sonne of Syrric died, after whom succeeded his sonne Fingal. MLXVI. Godred Crovan assembled a great fleet and came to Man, fought with the people of the land, but was overcome and put to rout. A second time hee rallied his forces and his fleet, sailed into Man, joined battell with the Manksmen, was van∣quished and driven out of the field. A third time he gathered a great multitude to∣gether, and by night arrived in the haven called Ramsa, and hid three hundred men within a wood, which stood upon the hanging hollow brow of an hill called Scacafel. Now when the sunne was risen, the Manksmen put their people in order of battell, and with a violent charge encountred with Godred. And when the fight was hot, those three hundred men starting out of the ambush behind their backes, began to foile the Manksmen and put them to the worst, yea and forced them to flye. Now when they saw themselves discomfited, and no place for them of refuge to escape, (for the sea water comming in with the tide had filled the channell of Ramsa river, and the enemies on the other side followed the chace hard) they that then remained alive tooke up a pitifull cry, and besought Godred to save their lives. And he moved with compassion, pittying their wofull calamity (as who for a certain time had beene nursed and brought up among them) sounded the retrait, and forbad his hoast to pursue them any longer. Goared the morrow after proposed this choice unto his owne army, whether they would rather divide Man among themselves, and therein dwell, or only take the sub∣stance and pillage of the countrey, and so returne unto their owne homes? But they chose rather to wast and spoile the whole Iland, and with the goods thereof to enrich themselves, and so returne home. But Godred himselfe, with those few Ilanders that remained with him, inhabited the South part of the Iland, and granted to the re∣maines of the Manksmen the North part, with this covenant and condition, That none of them should at any time venture and presume to challenge any part of the land by right of inheritance. Whereby it came to passe that even unto this day the whole Isle is the Kings domain alone, and all the revenues thereof belonging unto the crown. Godred then reduced Dublin, and a great part of Leymistir under his subjection. As for the Western Scottish, he so over-awed them, as that no man who built ship or cog-boat durst drive into it above three nailes. Now he reigned 16. yeeres, and died in the Iland that is called Yle. He left behind him verily three sons, Lagman, Harald, and Olave. Lagman the eldest taking upon him the kingdome, reigned seven yeeres. And Ha∣rald his brother a great while rebelled against him; but at length being taken priso∣ner by Lagman, he had his members of generation cut off, and his eyes plucked out of his head. After this Lagman repenting himselfe that he had pulled out his brothers eyes, gave over the kingdome of his owne accord, and wearing the badge of the Lords Crosse, took a journey to Jerusalem, in which he died. MLXXV. All the Nobles and Lords of the Islands, hearing of the death of Lagman, dispatched their Embassadors to Murecard O-Brien King of Ireland, requesting that hee would send some industrious and worthy man of the blood royall to be their King, untill Olave, Godreds sonne, came to full age. The King very willingly yeelded to their requests, and sent unto them one Dopnald the sonne of Tade, warning and charging him to govern the kingdome (which by right belonged unto another) with all gentlenesse and modesty. But he after he was come to the Crowne, not weighing of the charge that his Lord and M. gave him, abused his place, and lorded with great tyranny, and so committing many outrages and villanies, reigned cruelly three yeers. Then all the Princes of the Ilands agreed together in one conspiracy, rose up against him, and expelled him out of their coasts. Who fled into Ireland, and never looked them in the face after. MLXXVII. One Ingemund was sent from the King of Norway, to take upon him the dominion of the Ilands: and when he was come to the Isle Leodus, he sent messengers to all the Nobles of the Ilands, with a commandement that they should meet toge∣ther and ordain him their King: Mean while, himselfe with his companions did no∣thing else but rob, spoile, make good cheere and banquet, dishonour and abuse marri∣ed wives, defloure young maidens, yea and give himselfe over to filthy pleasures and fleshly lusts. But when tidings hereof came to the Nobles of the Ilands, now assem∣bled to make him King, they were set on fire with furious wrath, and sped themselves in all hast toward him: and surprising him in the night, burnt the house wherein hee was, and with fire and sword made a quick dispatch of him and his company. MXCVIII. The Abbey of S. Mary at Cistertium or Cisteaux was founded. Anti∣och was won by the Christians: and a Comet or blazing star appeared. The same yeere there was a field fought between those of the Isle of Man, at S antwas: and the Northren men got the victorie. In which battell were slaine Earle Oiher and Mac-Moras, Generals of both the sides. In the same yeere Magnus King of Norway, the son of Olave, son of Harald Harfager, desirous to try whether the corps of S. Olave King and Martyr remained uncorrupt, commanded that his tombe should be ope∣ned and notwithstanding the Bishop and Clergy withstood it, the King himselfe came boldly thither, and by force that he brought with him caused the coffin to be opened. Now when he had both seene and handled the body uncorrupt and nothing perished, sodainly there was a great feare fell upon him, and in all haste he departed thence. The next night following Olave King and Martyr appeared unto him in a dreame, saying thus: Chuse thou one of these two things, either to lose thy life and kingdome both within thirty daies, or to depart from Norway and never see it againe. When the King awakened, he called unto him his Princes and Elders, and declared unto them his dreame and vision: and they being sore affraid gave him this counsell, to depart with all speed out of Norway. He without delay caused a fleet to be rigged and put in readinesse, of an hundred and threescore saile, and cutteth over to the Isles of Orkney, which he forthwith subdued; & making way by dint of sword thorowout all the Iles, and bringing them to his subjection, went forward still as far as to Man, and when he was arrived and landed he came unto St. Patrickes Isle, to see the place wherein the field had beene fought a little before betweene the Manksmen, because as yet many of their bodies that were slaine lay there unburied. Now when he saw this most goodly and beautifull Iland, it pleased his eye, and he chose it to seat him∣selfe therein, built fortresses in it, which unto this day carry his name. And those of Galway he held in so great awe, that he compelled them to cut downe wood for tim∣ber, and to bring it unto the shore, that therewith he might build his Forts and Bul∣warkes. To Anglesey, then called Mona (an Iland in Wales) hee sailed, and found in it two Earles by the name of Hughes: the one he slew, the other he put to flight, and subdued the Iland. But the Welshmen presented him with many gifts, and so he bad them farwell, and returned unto Man. Unto Murcard King of Ireland he sent his shooes, and commanded him to carry them on his shoulders through the middest of his house on Christmas day, that he might thereby understand he was subject unto King Magnus. Which the Irishmen as soone as they heard of it took grievously, and disdained exceeding much. But the King following a wiser course, I had rather, saith he, not onely carry his shooes, but also eat them, than King Magnus should destroy one Province in Ireland. Hee fulfilled therefore his commandement, and honoura∣bly entreated his messengers. Many presents also hee sent over by them unto King Magnus, and entred into league with him. These messengers being returned unto their Lord, related unto him many things touching the situation of Ireland, the plea∣santnesse thereof, the abundance of corne and wholsomnesse of aire. When Mag∣nus heard this, straightwaies he thought of nothing else but to conquer Ireland, and bring it wholly under his dominion. He commanded therefore his men to prepare a navie; and himselfe in person setting forward with sixteene ships, desirous to take a view of the countrey, as he unwarily departed aside from his shipping, was suddenly compassed about by the Irish, and so lost his life, together with all those in manner that were with him. And he was buried hard by S. Patricks Church in Doun. Hee reigned sixe yeeres: after whose death the Princes of the Ilands sent for Olave the son of Godred surnamed Crovan, who lived in the Court of Henry King of England, son of King William. MCII. Olave, the sonne of Godred Crovan aforesaid, beganne his reigne and reigned forty yeeres: a peaceable Prince, having all the Kings of Ireland and Scotland to be his confederates. Hee tooke to wife Affrica the daughter of Ferguse of Gall∣way: of whom he begat Gadred. By his concubines he had Regnald, Lagman and Harald, beside many daughters, whereof one was wedded to Summerled Prince of Herergaidel, who was the cause of the ruine of the whole Kings of the Ilands. On her he begat foure sonnes, Dulgall, Raignald, Engus, and Olave. MCXXXIII. There hapned so great an Eclipse of the Sun, upon the fourth Nones of August, that the day was turned into night. MCXXXIV. Olave gave unto Yuo Abbat of Furnes a plot of his land in Man, to build an Abbay, in a place called Russin: and both enriched with revenues, and endowed with priviledges the estate of the Church in the Ilands. MCXLII. Godred, Olaves son, saileth over sea to the King of Norway, whose name was Hinge, and did his homage unto him, and staied there being honourably enter∣tained of him. The same yeere three sonnes of Harald, Olaves brother (who had been brought up in Dublin ) raising a great number of men together, and all those who were fled from the King, came to Man, demanding of the same King to have the one moity of the whole kingdome of the Ilands to bee given unto them. But the King, when he had heard their demand, being willing to pacifie them, answered, That hee would take counsell of the matter. Now when they had appointed the time and place where the counsell should bee held, in the meane while those most leud and wicked villaines complotted among themselves the Kings death. At the day appoin∣ted both parts met at the haven which is called Ramsa, and sat in order by rowes, the King with his counsell on the one side, and they together with their company on the other, and Reginald (who was to dispatch him) was in the midst between, and stood talking apart with one of the Peeres of the land. But when the King had called him and he was come unto him, he turned toward the King as though hee would salute him, and therewith lifting up a glittering axe a great height, at one blow cut off the Kings head. And forthwith as soone as they had committed such a bloody murder, they divided the land among themselves: and after some few daies, having gathe∣red a navie together, failed over to Galway, desirous to bring it also under their sub∣jection: But those of Galway sticking close and round together, gave a faire onset, and joined battell with them. They by and by turning their backes fled in great dis∣order to Man: And as for all the Galwaymen that dwelt therein, some of them they slew, others they expelled. MCXLIII. Godred, Olaves son, returning out of Norway was created King of Man, and to avenge his fathers death, he caused two of Haralds sons to have their eies pul∣led out, and slew the third. MCXLIV. Godred begun his reigne, and reigned thirty yeeres. In the third yeere of his reigne, the people of Dublin sent for him and created him King of Dublin, a∣gainst whom Mure-card King of Ireland raised war, and encamping himselfe before the Citie which is called Coridelis, sent his halfe brother (by the mothers side) Osibe∣ley, with three thousand men of armes to Dublin, who was by Godred and the Dublini∣ans slaine, and all the rest put to flight. These exploits atchieved, Godred returned to Man, began to use tyranny, and turned Noblemen out of their inheritances, whereof one called Thorsin, Oters Son, mightier than the rest, came to Sumerled and made Dubgall, Sumerleds son, King of the Ilands, subduing unto him many Ilands. When Godred had intelligence of these things by one Paul, he prepared a navie, and setteth forward to meet with Sumerled, who was comming with a fleet of 80. saile. And in the yeere 1156. there was a battell fought at sea on Twelfe day at night, and after many a man slaine on both sides, the next day after they grew to a pacification, and divided among themselves the kingdome of the Ilands: and so it became two seve∣rall kingdomes from that very day unto this present time. And this was the cause of the overthrow of the kingdome of the Isles, since time that Sumerleds son seized upon it. MCLVIII. Sumerled came to Man with a fleet of 53. saile, put Godred to flight, & wa∣sted the Iland. Godred then crossed over to Norway, to seek for aid against Sumerled. MCLXIV. Sumerled gathered together a fleet of 1060. ships, and arrived at Rhinfrin, coveting to subdue all Scotland. But by the just judgement of God hee was vanqui∣shed by a few, together with his sonne and an infinite number of people there slain. The same yeere there was a field fought at Ramsae betweene Reginald brother of Godred, and them of Man: and by the deceitfull practice of a certaine Earle, those of Man were put to flight. Then Reginald began to reigne, and on the fourth day after came Godred upon him out of Norway with a great multitude of armed men, and tooke his brother Re∣ginald, whom he bereft both of his eyes, and of his genitall members. The same yeere died Malcolm King of Scotland, and his brother William succeeded him in the king∣dome. MCLXVI. Two Comets or blazing stars appeared before Sun-rising in the Mo∣neth of August, the one in the South, the other in the North. MCLXXI. Richard Earle of Penbrock sailed over into Ireland, and subdued Develin with a great part of Ireland. MCLXXVI. John Curey conquered Ulster, and Vivian Legate of the Apostolicke Sea came into Man, and caused King Godred to bee lawfully espoused unto his wife Phingola, daughter of Mac-Lotlen, son to Murkartac King of Ireland, to wit, the mo∣ther of Olave then three yeers old. Sylvan the Abbat married them: unto whom the very same day Godred gave a piece of land at Miriscoge, where he built a Monastery: but at length the ground was together with the Monkes granted to the Abbey of Russin. Reginald sonne to Eac-Marcat, one of the royall blood, comming into Man with a great band of men in the Kings absence, at the first conflict put to flight certain war∣ders that kept the shore, and killed about 30. men. Afterwards the Manksmen gathe∣ring their forces together, the same day slew him and almost all his company. MCLXXXIII. O-Fogolt was Sheriffe of Man. MCLXXXV. There fell out to be an Eclipse of the Sun on Saint Philip and Jacobs day. MCLXXXVII. On the fourth Ides of November died Godred King of the Ilands: and the next Summer was his body translated to the Isle of Hy. He left behind him three sonnes, Reginald, Olave, and Tvar. In his life he ordained his sonne Olave to be his heire, because hee onely was borne in lawfull wedlock. But the people of Man, seeing that Olave was now scarce ten yeeres old, sent for Reginald out of the Iles, and set him up for their King. MCLXXXVIII. Reginald Godreds son began to raigne over the Ilands: and Mur∣chard, a man of great power throughout all the kingdome of the Iles, was slaine. MCXCII. A battell was fought betweene Reginald and Engus the sonnes of Su∣merled, but Engus won the victory. The same yeere was the Abbey of Russin tran∣slated to Dufglas : but after foure yeeres the Monks returned to Russin. MCCIII. Michael Bishop of the Isles died at Fontans, after whom succeeded Ni∣colas. MCCIV. Hugh Lacy came with an army into Ulster, and gave John Curcy battell, tooke him prisoner, and conquered Ulster. Afterward hee set John at liberty, who came to King Reginald: and he honourably entertained him, because he was his bro∣ther in law: for John Curcy had taken to wife Affrica Godreds daughter, who foun∣ded the Abbey of S. Mary de Iugo Domini, and was there buried. MCCV. John Curcy and Reginald King of the Iles having entred into Ulster with one hundred ships, in the haven which is called Stranford, slackly besieged the fortresse of Rath: but Walter Lacy comming upon them with an army, put them to flight: af∣ter this Curcy never recovered his land. MCCX. Engus, Sumerleds son, was with three of his sonnes slaine. John King of England at the same time brought a navie of 500. saile to Ireland, & subdued it: who sending a certaine Earle named Fulk unto Man, in one fortnight and a day wholly in a manner wasted it: and taking hostages, returned thence into their country. King Reginald and his Nobles were not in Man. MCCXVII. Nicolas Bishop of the Ilands departed this life and was buried in Ulster within the house of Benchor, after whom succeeded Reginald. Here I thinke good to write somewhat againe of Olave and Reginald, Brethren. REginald gave unto his brother Olave the Ile called Lodhus, which is said to be lar∣ger than the rest of the Ilands, but slenderly inhabited, because it stands much upon mountaines, is stony besides, and almost all unfit for tillage. The inhabitants thereof live for the most part by hunting and fishing. Olave therfore went to possesse himselfe of this Iland, and dwelt in it, leading a poore life. And when he saw it would not suffice to maintaine himselfe and his army, he came boldly unto his brother Re∣ginald, who then made his abode in the Ilands, and spake unto him in this maner. Bro∣ther, saith hee, my Soveraigne Lord the King, thou knowest that the kingdome of the Ilands belonged unto me by inheritance; but since the Lord hath elected thee to sway the Scepter thereof, I envie thee not, nor take it grievously that thou art exalted to that royall dignity. Now thus much I heartily beseech thee, that thou wouldest provide me some portion of land in the Iles, wherein I may live honestly according to mine estate: for the Iland Lodhus which thou gavest unto me is not sufficient to sustaine me. Reginald his brother after he had given him the hearing, said he would take counsell upon the point: and the morrow after, when Olave was sent for, and came in place to parley of the matter, Reginald commandeth that hee should be ap∣prehended and brought unto William King of Scotland, that with him he might be kept in prison. And Olave lay prisoner in irons and chaines almost seven yeeres. In the seventh yeere died William King of Scotland, after whom succeeded his sonne Alexander. Now before his death he gave commandement that all prisoners should be set free. Olave therefore being enlarged and at liberty came to Man: and soone after, accompanied with no small traine of Noblemen, he went to S. James: and after he was thus returned Reginald his brother caused him to marry a Noble mans daugh∣ter of Kentyre, even his owne wives whole sister, named Lavon, and gave him Lod∣hus in possession to enjoy. Some few daies after Reginald Bishop of the Ilands having called a Synod, canonically divorced Olave the sonne of Godred, and Lavon his wife, as being the cousin german of his former wife. After this Olave wedded Scristine daughter of Ferkar Earle of Rosse. For this cause Reginalds wife Queene of the Ilands was wroth, and directed her letters in the name of Reginald the King, into the Ile Sky, unto Godred her sonne that he should kill Olave. As Godred was devising meanes to worke this feat, and now en∣tring into Lodhus, Olave fled in a little cog-boat unto his father in law, the Earle of Rosse aforesaid. Then Godred wasteth and spoileth Lodhus. At the same time Pol the son of Boke Sheriffe of Sky, a man of great authority in all the Ilands, because he would not give his consent unto Godred, fled, and together with Olave lived in the Earle of Rosses house: and entring into a league with Olave they came both in one ship to Sky. At length having sent forth their spies and discoverers, they learned that Godred lay in a certain Iland called St. Columbs Ile, having very few men with him, misdoubting nothing. Gathering therefore about them all their friends and acquain∣tance, with such voluntaries as were ready to joine with them, at midnight with five shippes which they drew from the next sea-shore, distant from the Island aforesaid some two furlongs, they beset the Isle round about. Godred then, and they that were with him, rising by the dawning of the day, and seeing themselves environed on every side with enemies, were astonied: but putting themselves in warlike armes, as∣saied right manfully to make resistance, but all in vaine. For about nine a clocke of the day Olave and Pol the foresaid Sheriffe set foot in the Iland, with their whole ar∣my, & having slain all those whom they found without the enclosure of the Church, they tooke Godred, put out his eyes, and gelded him. Howbeit to this deed Olave did not yeeld his consent, neither could he withstand it, for Bokes sonne, the Sheriffe aforesaid. For this was done in the yeere 1223. The Summer next following Olave, after he had taken hostages of all the Lords and potentates of the Isles, came with a fleet of 32. saile toward Man, and arrived at Rognolfwaht. At this very time Reginald and Olave divided the kingdome of the I∣lands between themselves, and Man was given to Reginald over and beside his owne portion, together with the title of King. Olave the second time, having furnished himselfe with victuals from the people of Man, returned with his company to his portion of the Iland. The yeere following, Reginald taking with him Alane Lord of Galway, went with his souldiers of Man to the Iland parts, that hee might disseize his brother Olave of that portion of land which hee had given unto him, and bring it under his owne dominion. But because the Manksmen were not willing to fight against Olave and the Ilanders, for the love they had to them, Reginald and Alan Lord of Galway returned home without at∣chieving their purpose. After a little while, Reginald under pretence of going to the Court of his Soveraigne the Lord King of England, tooke up of the people of Man an hundred Markes, but went in very deed to the Court of Alan Lord of Galway. At the same time he affianced his daughter unto the son of Alan in marriage. Which the Manksmen hearing, tooke such snuffe and indignation thereat, that they sent for Olave, and made him their King. MCCXXVI. Olave recovered his inheritance, to wit, the kingdome of Man and of the Ilands, which his brother Reginald had governed 38. yeeres, and reigned quietly two yeeres. MCCXXVIII. Olave accompanied with all the Nobles of Man, and a band of the strongest men of the country, sailed over into the Ilands. A little after Alan Lord of Galway, and Thomas Earle of Athol, and King Reginald, came unto Man with a pu∣issant army: all the South part of Man they wasted, spoiled the Churches, and slew all the men they could lay hold of, so that the South part of Man was laid in manner all desolate. After this returned Alan with his army into his owne country, and left his bailiffes in Man, to gather up for him the tributes of the country. But King Olave came upon them at unwares, put them to flight and recovered his owne kingdome. Then the people of Man, which before time had been dispersed every way, began to gather themselves together, and to dwell with confidence and security. In the same yeere came King Reginald out of Galway unlooked for, at the dead time of night in winter, with five ships, and burnt all the shipping of his brother O∣lave, and of the Lords of Man at Saint Patrickes Iland: and suing to his brother for peace, stayed forty daies at the haven of Ragnoll-wath. Meane while he won and drew unto him all the Ilanders in the South part of Man, who sware they would venture their lives in his quarrell, untill hee were invested in the one halfe of the kingdome. On the contrarie part, Olave had the Northren men of the Isle to side with him: and upon the 14. day of February, at a place called Tingualla, there was a battell strucke betweene the two brethren, wherein Olave had the victorie: and King Reginald was by some killed there without his brothers knowledge. And certaine rovers comming to the South part of Man wasted and harried it. The Monks of Russin tran∣slated the body of King Reginald unto the Abbey of S. Mary de Fournes, and there enterred it was in a place which himselfe had chosen for that purpose. After this went Olave to the King of Norway; but before that hee was come thither, Haco King of Norway ordained a certaine Noble man named Hu bac, the sonne of Ow∣mund for to bee King of the Sodorian Ilands, and called his name Haco. Now the same Haco, together with Olave, and Godred Don Reginalds son, and many Norwe∣gians came unto the Ilands: and at the winning of a fort in the Iland Both, Haco chan∣ced to be smit with a stone, whereof he died, and lieth buried in Iona. MCCXXX. Olave came with Godred Don and the Norwegians to Man: and they divided the kingdome among themselves: Olave held Man, and Godred being gone unto the Ilands, was slaine in the Isle Lodhus. So obtained Olave the kindgome of the Isles. MCCXXXVII. On the twelfth Calends of June died Olave the sonne of Godred King of Man, in S. Patricks Iland, and was buried in the Abbey of Russin. He reigned eleven yeeres, two by his brothers life, and nine after his death. Harold his sonne succeeded him being 14. yeeres of age, and reigned 12. yeeres. In the first yeere of his reigne he made a journey to the Ilands, and appointed Loglen his cousin, Custos of Man. In the Autumne following Harald sent three sonnes of Nell, namely, Dufgald, Thorquill Mormore, and his friend Ioseph to Man, for to con∣sult about affaires. On the 25. day therefore they meet at Tingull: and by occasion of a certaine envious quarrell that arose between the sonnes of Nell and Loglen, there was a sore fight on both sides, wherein were slaine Dufgald, Mormore, and the fore∣said Joseph. In the spring ensuing King Harald came to the Isle of Man, and Loglen, as he fled toward Wales, perished by Shipwracke, with Godred Olaves sonne his fo∣ster child and pupill, with 40. others. MCCXXXVIII. Gospatricke and Gillescrist the sonne of Mac-Kerthac came from the King of Norway into Man, who by force kept Harald out of Man, and tooke tri∣butes to the Kings behoofe of Norway, because he refused to come unto the King of Norwaies Court. MCCXL. Gospatric died, and is buried in the Abbey of Russin. MCCXXXIX. Harald went unto the King of Norway, who after two yeeres confir∣med unto him, his heires and successours under his seale, all the Ilands which his pre∣decessours had possessed. MCCXLII. Harald returned out of Norway to Man, and being by the inhabitants honourably received, had peace with the Kings of England and of Scotland. Harald, like as his father before him, was by the King of England dubbed Knight, and after he had been rewarded with many gifts returned home. The same yeere he was sent for by the King of Norway, and married his daughter. And in the yeere 1249. as he returned homeward with his wife, and Laurence King elect of Man, and many other Nobles and Gentlemen, he was drowned in a tempest neere unto the coasts of Radland. MCCXLIX. Reginald the sonne of Olave and brother to Harald, began his reigne the day before the Nones of May, and on the thirtieth day thereof was slaine by one Yvar a Knight and his company, in a medow neere unto the Holy Trinity Church, on the South side, and lieth buried in the Church of Saint Mary of Russin. At that time Alexander King of Scots rigged and brought together many ships, meaning to subdue the Iland: and in the Ile Kerwaray he died of an ague. Harald the sonne of Godred Don usurped the name of King in the Ilands: all the Nobles of Harald King Olaves sonne hee banished, and placed in their stead all the Princes and Peeres that were fled from the said Harald. MCCL. Harald the sonne of Godred Don, being by missives sent for, went unto the King of Norway, who kept him in prison, because he had unjustly intruded him∣selfe into the kingdome. The same yeere there arrived at Roghalwaght Magnus the son of Olave, and John the sonne of Dugald, who named himselfe King: but the people of Man taking it to the heart that Magnus was not nominated, would not suffer them to land there: many of them therefore were cast away and perished by shipwracke. MCCLII. Magnus the sonne of Olave came to Man, and was made King: The next yeere he went to the King of Norway, and stayed there a yeere. MCCLIV. Haco King of Norway ordained Magnus, Olaves sonne, King of the Isles, and confirmed the same unto him and his heires, and by name unto his brother Harald. MCCLVI. Magnus King of Man went into England, and was knighted by the King of England. "MCCLVII. The church of S. Maries of Russin was dedicated by Richard of Sodore. MCCLX. Haco King of Norway came unto the parts of Scotland, and without any exploit done turned to the Orkneys: where at Kirwas he ended his daies, and ly∣eth enterred at Bergh. MCCLXV. Magnus, Olaves sonne King of Man and of the Ilands, departed this life at the Castle of Russin, and was buried in the Church of S. Mary de Russin. MCCLXVI. The kingdome of the Ilands was translated, by reason of Alexander King of Scots. That which followeth was written in another hand, and of a later character. MCCLXX. The seventh day of October, a navy set out by Alexander King of Scots, ar∣rived at Roghalwath : and the next morrow before sun rising a battaile was fought be∣tween the people of Man and the Scots, in which were slain of the Manksmen 537. where∣upon a certaine versifier played thus upon the number. L. decies, X. ter, & penta duo cecidere, Mannica gens de te, damna futura cave. L. Ten times told, X. thrice, with five beside and twaine, Ware future harmes, I reed, of thy folke Man were slaine. MCCCXIII. Robert King of Scots besieged the Castle of Russin, which Dingawy Dowyll held against him: but in the end the King won the castle: MCCCXVI. On the Ascension day, Richard le Mandevile and his brethren with other Potentates of Ireland, arrived at Ramaldwath, requesting to be furnished with victuals and silver, for that they had been robbed by the enemies warring upon them continually. Now when the commonality of the country had made answer, that they would not give them any: they advanced forward against those of Man with two troops or squadrons, untill they were come as far as to the side of Warthfell hill, in a field wherein John Mandevile remained, and there in a fought battell the Irish vanquished the Manksmen, spoiled the Iland, and rifled the Abbey of Russin: and after they had continued in the Iland one whole moneth, they returned home with their ships fraught with pillage. Thus endeth the Chronicle of the K.K. of Man. The Processe or course of the Historie following, I will now continue summarily out of other Writers. WHen Alexander the third King of Scots had gotten into his hands the We∣sterne Ilands, partly by way of conquest, and in part for ready money paid un∣to the King of Norway, hee attempted the Ile of Man also, as one of that number, and through the valiant prowesse of Alexander Stewart brought it under his domini∣on: yea and placed there a petty King or Prince, with this condition, that hee should be ready alwaies at his command, to serve with ten ships in his warres at sea. How∣beit Mary, the daughter of Reginald King of Man (who was become the Liege-man of John King of England) entred her suit for the Iland before the King of England: but answer was made unto her, that shee should demand it of the King of Scots, for that he then held it in possession. And yet her grand-child John Waldebeof (for the said Mary married into the house of Waldebeofe) sued for his ancient right in Par∣liament, holden in the 33. yeere of King Edward the first, before the K. of England, as the superiour Lord of the kingdome of Scotland. But none other answer could he have than this (if I may speake the words out of the very authenticall Records) Se∣quatur coram Iustitiariis de Banco Regis, &c. that is, Let him sue before the Iustices of the K. Bench, let him be heard, and let justice be done. But that which he could not ob∣taine by right, Sir William Montacute, his kinsman (for come he was of the race of the Kings of Man) wonne by his sword. For with a band of English mustered up in hast, he drave all the Scots out of the Iland. But being by this warre plunged deeply in debt, and not having wherewith to make some paiment thereof, he mortgaged it for seven yeeres to Antonie Bec Bishop of Durham, and Patriarch of Jerusalem, and made over the profits and revenues thereof unto him: yea and soone after the King granted it unto the said Antonie for tearme of life. Afterwards, King Edward the se∣cond passed a grant thereof unto his minion Piers Gaveston, what time as he created him Earle of Cornwall: and when the said Piers was rid out of the way, hee gave it unto Henry Beaumont, with all the domaine and regall jurisdiction thereto belon∣ging. But shortly after the Scots under Robert Brus recovered it; and Robert Randulph that right warlike Scot, like as a long time after Alexander Duke of Albany, used to stile themselves Lords of Man, and bare the same coat of Armes, as did the later Kings of Man; namely, three armed legges of a man linked together, and bending in the hammes: such for all the world as the Isle Sicilia gave, the three legges naked, in like forme in her coines of money in old time, to signifie three Promontories. Notwith∣standing, before time the Kings of Man used for their armes, as we have seene in their Seales, a ship with the saile hoised up, with this title in the circumference, Rex Man∣niae & insularum, that is, King of Man and of the Islands. Afterward, about the yeere 1340. William Montacute the younger, Earle of Salisbury wrested it by strong hand and force of armes from the Scottish: who in the yeere of our Lord 1393. as Thomas Walsingham saith, sold for a great summe of money, Man, with the crowne thereof, un∣to William Scrope. Who being for high treason beheaded, and his goods confiscate, it came unto the hands of Henry the fourth King of England: who granted this Iland unto Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland (as a conqueror triumphing over William Scrope, whom he as yet a private person had intercepted and beheaded, when he as∣pired to the crowne) with this condition: that himselfe and his heires should when the Kings of England were enstalled and crowned, carry before them that sword, which the said Henry wore by his side, what time he came backe againe out of exile into England, commonly called Lancaster sword. But I think it good to set this down out of the Record, in the very words of the K. himself. De nostra gratia speciali dedi∣mus, that is: Of our speciall grace we have given and granted unto Henry Earle of Nor∣thumberland, the Isle, Castle, Pile, and Seigniory of Man, and all the Ilands and Lord∣ships to the said Isle belonging, which were Sir William le Scropes, Knight, now deceased, (whom in his life time we conquered, and have decreed him so to be conquered) and which by reason of our conquest of him we tooke into our hand as conquered: which conquest ve∣rily and decree in our present Parliament, with the assent of the Lords Temporall in the same Parliament being, as touching the person of the foresaid William, and all the lands, tenements, goods, and chattels of his, as well within our kingdome as without, at the pe∣tition of the Communalty of our kingdome, stand confirmed, &c. To have and to hold unto the said Earle, and his heires, &c. by service of carrying at the daies of our coronation, and of our heires, at the left shoulder, and the left shoulder of our heires, either by himself or a sufficient and honourable Deputy of his, that sword naked which we ware, and were girt with, when we arrived in the parts of Holdernesse, called Lancaster sword, &c. But in the fifth yeere following the said Henry Percie entred into open rebellion, and the King sent Sir Iohn Stanley and William Stanley to seize the Isle and castle of Man, the inheritance whereof he granted afterward to Sir Iohn Stanley and his heires by letters Patents, with the patronage of the Bishopricke, &c. And so his heires and successours, who were honoured with the title of Earles of Derby, were commonly called Kings of Man. Annales of Th. Otterborn. Anno 7. H. 4. From Man, untill we come to the Mull of Gallaway, we meet with none but very small Ilands. But after we be once past it, in the salt water of GLOTTA, or Dunbrit∣ton Frith appeareth the Iland GLOTTA, whereof Antoninus maketh mention, which the Scots now call Arran, whereof the Earles of Arran in Scotland were stiled: and neighbouring unto it is that which was in times past named Rothesia, now Buthe of a sacred Cell which Brendan erected (for so they terme a little Cell in Scottish) thence come we to Hellan, in times past called Hellan Leneaw, that is, as Iohn Fordon interpreteth it, The Isle of Saints, and to Hellan Tinoc, that is, The Isle of Swine: and these Ilands are seen in the same Frith or Forth. But of these I have spoken before. Without this Bay or Frith lye a number of Ilands very thicke together, which the Scots themselves that inhabite them call Inch-Gall, that is haply, The Isles of the Gallicians: the English and the rest of the Scots, The Western Isles: the writers of the former age HEBRIDES; but the ancient Ethnickes Bettoricae, and Giraldus o∣ther where Inchades and Leucades: Pliny, Solinus, and Ptolomee name them EBUDAS, HEBUDAS, and , which names have some consonant affinity with Epidium the promontory of Britain opposite unto them, and an Isle among these so named. The reason of the name I cannot picke out, unlesse I should thinke they were so called, be∣cause there groweth here no corne or graine. For Solinus writeth, Scottish or we∣sterne Iles. that the inhabitants of these Ilands are not acquainted with corne, and live onely upon fish and milke: and Eb eid in British soundeth as much as without corne. The inhabitants, as saith the same Solinus, have no skill or knowledge of corne, they live of fish and milke onely. They all have but one King: For how many soever they be, they are severed one from another by a narrow enterflow of the Sea betweene. The King hath nothing that hee may say is his owne, all things are common to them all: and held hee is to equity by certaine lawes: and lest hee should for cove∣tousnesse swarve aside from the truth, by his poore estate he learneth justice, as who hath no house, furniture, and provision of his owne, but all his maintenance is from the common coffer. No woman is he allowed to have in propriety, but by turnes hee taketh for to use whomsoever hee fancieth, whereby hee neither can have his wish, nor hope of chil∣dren. Of these Islands, the common people affirmeth there bee 44. whereas in truth there are many more. Pliny wrote that there were 30. of them. But Ptolomee reckoneth up but five. The first is RICINA, Pliny calleth it RICNEA, Antoninus RI∣DUNA, now termed Racline: and I think it should be read in Antonine Riclina: for (cl) easily maketh a (d) by joining a (c) at the backe unto it. A small Iland this is, butting full upon Ireland, knowne unto the ancient writers, for that it lieth in the very nar∣row sea betweene Ireland and Scotland: famous at this day for no cause else, but for the overthrow and slaughter of the Scottish Irish, who otherwhiles possessed them∣selves of it, and were thrust out by the English, under the conduct of Sir William Norris in the yeere 1575. The next is EPIDIUM, which by the name I would ghesse, with that excellent Geographer Gerard Mercator, lay neere unto the pro∣montorie of the Epidii, and to the shore. And seeing there standeth apparently in the same situation an Iland called Ila, of good largenesse, and of a fruitfull, plaine, and champion soile, I dare avouch that this was Epidium, or the Isle of the Epidii ; for in some places it is read . This carrieth in length 24. miles, and is 16. miles broad, so plentifull of cattell, wheat, and heards of red deere, that it was the second seat next unto Man, for the King of the Ilands, as it is at this day of the Mac-Connels, who herein have their Castle at Dunyweg. Betwixt Ila and Scotland lieth Iona, which Bede tearmeth Hy and Hu, given by the Picts unto the Scottish Monkes, for propagating and preaching of the Gospell among them: where stood a Monasterie, famous by reason of the Scottish Kings tombes and the frequent conversing of holy men therein: among whom Columba, the Apostle of the Picts, was the principall: of whose Cell the Iland also is called Columb-Kill, like as the man also himselfe, by a compound name was termed Columbkill, as Bede witnesseth. And here at length, as some will have it, a Bishops seat was ordained in Sodore, a little towne, whence all the Iles were also called Sodorensis, for that it is reckoned to be in his Diocesse. Then have you MALEOS, that Ptolomee writeth of, now called Mula, whereof Plinie seemeth to make mention, when hee saith, Mella is reported to bee 25. miles larger than the rest. For so we read in the most ancient edition of Plinie, printed at Venice, whereas in the Vulgar copies, in steed of Reliquarum Mella, is read Reliquarum nul∣la, that is, None of the rest, &c. The Eastern HEBUDA, now called Skie, from hence lieth out in a great length over against the shore or coast of Scotland: the Westerne HEBUDA bending more Westward, is now called Lewis (the Lord whereof is Mac-Cloyd ) and in the ancient history of Man is named Lodhus, full of steep and craggie lit∣tle hills, stony and very slenderly inhabited: howbeit the largest of them all; from which Eust is dis-joined with a very narrow wash. All the rest, save onely Hyrtha, are of small account, being either very stony, or else inaccessible by reason of craggy cliffes, & scarce clad with any green-sord. Yet the Scots purchased all these with their ready mony of the Norwegians (as I have said before) as if they had beene the very buttresses or pillars of the kingdome, although they reape very small commodity thereby: considering that the inhabitants, the ancient true Scots or Irish, being men of stout stomackes and desperate boldnesse, will by no meanes be subject to the severity of lawes, or awed by justice. As touching their manners, apparell, and lan∣guage they differ nothing at all from the wild Irishry, of whom we have spoken be∣fore: so that wee may easily know thereby that they be one and the selfe same nati∣on originally. They that beare the sway and doe rule in these Ilands are the fami∣lies of Mac-Conel, Mac-Alen, whom others terme Mac-len, Mac-Cloyd of Lewis, and Mac-Cloyd of Harich. But the mightiest house of them all is that of the Mac-Conels, who glory in their pedegree, as derived from Donald, who in the reigne of Iames the third stiled himselfe King of the Ilands, and with all kinde of cruelty in most savage and barbarous manner plagued Scotland: which notwithstanding, his sonne being outlawed paied deerely, as forced to submit his whole estate absolutely unto the Kings will and pleasure, and had of his gift some possessions assigned to him in Can∣tire. In the foregoing age, of this stocke there flourished Donel Gormy, Mac-Conell, that is, The blew, haply so surnamed of his apparell. He had issue two sonnes, Agnus Mac-Conell, and Alexander, he who leaving this barren and hungry Cantir, invaded the Glinnes in Ireland. Agnus Mac-Conell aforesaid, was father of Iames Mac-Conell slaine by Shan O-Neale, and of Surley Boy, upon whom Queene Elizabeth of her bounty bestowed lands in Rout within Ireland. Iames Mac-Conell had issue Agnus Mac-Conell, of whom I have spoken before, between whom and Mac-Clen there was such a deepe and inveterate hatred, that the force of consanguinity was never able to quench the feud, but that they polluted themselves most wickedly with one ano∣thers bloud. From the Haebudes, if you hold sailes along by the shore toward the North-east, you may at length discover the ORCADES, now called ORKNEY, being thirty Ilands or thereabout, sundred by the Ocean which hath his walke and current betweene them. A certain ancient fragment so calleth them, as one would say, Argat, that is, as the same interpreteth it, Above the Getes: but I would rather expound it, Above Cath: for it lyeth over against Cath, a countrey of Scotland, which of the Promontory they use to call Cathnesse: the inhabitants whereof seeme to be named amisse by Ptolomee, CARINI for CATINI. In Solinus his time no man dwelled in them, but overgrowne they were Vinceis, or Iunceis herbis, that is, With binding or rushy weeds: but now inhabited indeed they are, yet destitute of woods, bearing barley good store, and altogether without wheat. Among these Pomonia, famous for an Episcopall See, is the principall, called by Solinus POMONA Diutina, for the length of the daies there: now the inhabitants tearme it Mainland, as if it were the continent or maine, adorned with the Bishops seat in Kirkwale a little towne, and with two castles: it yeeldeth plenty of tinne and of lead. OCETIS also is reckoned by Pto∣lomee in number of these, which now we ghesse to be named Hethy. But whether Hey, which is counted one of these, be Plinies DUMNA or no, I could never yet resolve. Surely if it be not, I would thinke that Faire Isle, the onely towne whereof (for it hath but one) they call Dumo, is that Dumna rather than with Becanus judge Wardhuys in Lapland to be it. Iulius Agricola, who first of all sailed round a∣bout Britaine with his fleet, discovered out of these Isles of Orkney, which till that time were unknowne and subdued them, if we may beleeve Tacitus: but question∣lesse they were knowne in the time of Claudius the Emperour; for Pomponius Mela who then lived mentioneth them. Yet doubtlesse Orosius is untrue, in that he writeth that Claudius conquered them: and so farre is it off that Claudius should conquer them (which is avouched in S. Hieroms Chronicles) that Iuvenal in Hadrians time, not long after Agricola, wrote thus of them. —Arma quid ultra Littora Iuvernae promovimus, & modò captas Orcades, & minima contentos nocte Britannos? Why warred we past Irish coasts, and Orkneys lately won, Beyond the Britans, where there is least night and longest Sun? Afterward when the Romans Empire in Britaine was utterly decaied, now the Saxons, as it seemeth, were seated in them: for Claudian the Poet plaied upon them in these termes. —Maduerunt Saxone fuso Orcades.— With Saxons blood that there were slaine The Orkneys was imbrued againe. Ninnius also writeth, that Octha and Ehissus Saxons, who served for pay under the Britans, sailed round about the Picts with 40. Ciules, that is, Flyboats or Roving Pinnaces, and wasted the Iles of Orkney. After this, they came into the hands of the Norwegians (whence it is that the inhabitants speake the Gothes language) by the grant of Donald Ban, who after the death of his brother Malcom Can-Mor, King of Scots, by excluding his nephewes, had usurped the kingdome, that by their helpe he might be assisted in that intended ambition: and the Norwegians held the posses∣sion of them unto the yeere of salvation 1266. For then Magnus, the fourth of that name, King of Norway, being by the Scots that warred upon him brought to distresse, surrendred them up againe unto Alexander, the third King of the Scots, by covenant and composition, which Haquin King of the Norwegians confirmed unto King Ro∣bert Brus, in the yeere 1312. And at length in the yeere 1498. Christian the first, King of Norway and of Denmark, renounced all his right for himselfe and his succes∣sours, when he affianced his daughter unto James, the third King of Scots, and made over all his interest to his said sonne in law and his successours: and for the stronger assurance thereof, the Popes confirmation was procured to ratifie the same. To say nothing of the Earles of Orkney that were of more ancient times, Earles of Ork∣ney. who also in right of inheritance obtained the Earldomes of Cathnesse and of Strathern, at the last the title of Orkney came by an heire female unto Sir William Sent-cler: and William the fourth of this line, called The Prodigall Earl for wasting his patrimony, was the last Earle of this race. Howbeit, his posterity enjoyed the honour to be Ba∣ron Sent-cler, unto these daies. And the title of Cathnes remaineth still in the posteri∣ty of his brother. But within our remembrance this honourable title of the Earle of Orkney and Lord of Shetland was conferred upon Robert, a base sonne of King James the fifth; and Patrick Steward his sonne enjoyeth the same at this present. Beyond the Iles of Orkney, and above Britaine, the author of that ancient Com∣mentary upon Horace, placeth the Fortunate Ilands, wherein, as they write, none dwell but devout and just men; and the Grecians in their verses celebrate the pleasant∣nesse and fertility of the place, calling them the Elysian fields. But as touching these Fortunate Isles, take with you, if you please, another relation of that old fabulous Gre∣cian, Isacius Tzetzes out of his notes upon Lycophron: In the Ocean (saith he) there is a British Iland, between West Britain and Thule that looke toward the East. Thither men say the soules of the dead are translated over: for on the shore of that sea wherein the I∣land of Britaine lieth, there dwelt fisher-men, subject unto the French, but paying them no tribute, because (as they say) they ferry over the soules and folk departed. When these fisher∣men returne home in the evening, within a while after they heare some knocking at the door, and heare a voice calling them unto their work. Then rise they, and to the shore they goe, not knowing what causeth them for to goe; where they see boats prepared, but none of their owne, and no men in them: which when they be entred into, they fall to their oares, and feele the weight of the said boats as if they were laden with men, but see no body. Af∣ter that, with one push they come to a British Iland in a trice, whereas otherwise in ships of their own they could hardly get thither with a day and nights sailing. Now when they are come to the Iland, then again they see no creature, but heare a voice of those that receive them that are a shipboard, and count them by the kinred of father and mother, yea and call them one by one according to their dignity, art, and name. But they, after that the ship is discharged of her load, return home againe with one yerke of their oares. Hence it is that many men thinke these be the Ilands of blessed ghosts. Of the same stampe also may that Poeticall Geographer seeme to be, of whom Muretus maketh mention in his variety of readings: who hath written that C. Iulius Caesar went thither once in a great galley, with an hundred men aboard: and when he was willing to have seated himselfe there (as being wondrously delighted with the incredible pleasantnesse of the place) he was full against his will, and struggling what he could to the contrary, throwne out by those invisible inhabitants. Thule. Five daies and nights sailing from the Isles of Orkney, Solinus placeth THULE: An Iland, if any other, often celebrated by the Poets, whensoever they would signi∣fie any thing very remote and farre off, as if it were the furthest part of the whole world. Hereupon saith Virgil, Tibi serviat ultima Thule, that is, Let Thule most re∣mote thee serve: Seneca, Terrarum ultima Thule, that is, Thule the farthest land that is: Juvenal, De conducendo loquitur jam Rhetore Thule, that is, Now Thule speakes, how Oratours to hire: Claudian, Thulen procul axe remotam, that is, Thule far remote un∣der the Pole, and in another place, Ratibus{que} impervia Thule, And Thule where no ships can passe: Statius, Ignotam vincere Thulen, that is, To conquer Thule all unknowne: And Ammianus Marcellinus, by way of an Adage or Proverbiall speech, useth it in these words, Etiamsi apud Thulen moraretur, that is, Although he made his abode even in Thule. To passe over other testimonies, give me leave yet to note thus much more∣over, that the said Statius used Thule for Britaine, Thule for Bri∣taine. in these his verses. Caerulus haud alitèr cùm dimicat incola Thules, Agmina falcifero circumvenit acta covino. Even so the blew inhabitants of Thule when they fight, Environ battels, marching on with sithed chariots might. As also in this place of his Poem entituled Sylvae, as it seemeth: —restuo circumsona gurgite Thule. Thule that doth resound amaine, With sea that ebbes and flowes againe. Suidas writeth, that it tooke the name of Thules a King of Aegypt: Isidore, of the Sunne: Reynerus Reneccius, of the Saxon word Tell, that is, A limit, as if it were the bound of the North and West. But yet for all this, Synesius doubteth whether there were any Thule or no; and our Giraldus Cambrensis writeth, that it is no where extant to be seene: and the bet∣ter sort of learned men are of sundry judgements concerning it. Most of them have affirmed Island, Island. that is subject to extreme sharpe cold and continuall winter, to have beene called in times past Thule. But Saxo Grammaticus, Crantzius, Milius, Iovius, and Peucerus are of a contrary opi∣nion. Neither am I ignorant, that the vast and huge country of Scandia is described by Procopius under the name of Thule. Lib. 2. belli Go∣thici. But if that be true which the most learned Peu∣cer hath recorded in his book entituled De dimensione terrae, that is, Of the measuring of the earth, that sailers call Shetland Thilensel (neither dare I empeach his credit) then surely wee have found Thule, and the matter is now at an end and questionlesse. For this Shetland is an Isle under the Scottish dominion, Shetland, which some call Hethland. environed with other Islets, and the same is nipped with frost and chilly cold, lying open on every side unto bit∣ter storms; the inhabitants whereof, like as those of Island, use in steed of bread-corne dried fish, and the same braied and beaten, which we call stock-fish. And although it have not the North pole so elevated, that there is continuall day sixe moneths to∣gether, as Pithaeas of Marsils hath fained of Thule (for which hee is justly taxed by Strabo: ) and this hapneth not to Island it selfe, where there is in manner a continuall Winter, and an intolerable settled cold. Yet that a man should thinke this Shetland to have been Thule, first the situation thereof in Ptolomee may induce him, being set 63. degrees from the Aequinoctiall, as Thule is in Ptolomee: again, for that it lieth be∣tween Norway and Scotland, where Saxo Grammaticus placeth Thule: then, because it is two daies sailing distant from the point of Caledonia or Cathnes, according to which distance Solinus placeth Thule: also, Tacitus saith that the Romans kenned Thule afar off, as they sailed round about Britain by the Orcades: lastly, because it fa∣ceth the shore of Bergae in Norway, against which place Thule lieth according to Pom∣ponius Mela: in which Author the reading is corruptly, Belgarum littori in stead of Bergarum. For Bergae a citie in Norway lieth over against Shetland: and Pliny nameth in this tract BERGOS, Bergos. which I doubt not but it is that little country wherein BERGAE flourisheth, Nerigon. like as no man will deny that Norway is NERIGON specified by Pliny. But enough of this Thule, which snow and winter weather, as one saith, hath hidden from the ancient writers, and from us too I assure you: neither is any of them able to say, which of the Northren Ilands they meant, when they spake so much of Thule. As touching the length of daies in that unknowne Iland, Festus Avienus, when hee treated of Britaine, translated out of Dionysius these verses. Long a dehinc celeri si quis rate marmora currat, Inveniet vasto surgentem gurgite Thulen ; Hic cùm plaustra Poli tangit Phaebeius ignis, Nocte sub inlustri rota solis fomite flagrat Continuo, clarumque diem nox aemula ducit. From hence if one with pinnace swift along the sea doth saile, Thule above the Ocean vast to finde he shall not faile: Here when about the Northren pole the Suns fire doth sejourne, The night is lightsome, and his wheeles continually doe burne, The night, I say, resembling day faire light makes soone returne. Which Pomponius Mela likewise hath noted in these words. Opposite unto the coast of Bergae lieth Thule, an Iland much renowned both in Greek Poems, and in ours also. In it, for that the Sun riseth and is to set farre off, the nights verily are short; but in win∣ter time, as elsewhere, darke; in summer light: because all that time hee mounteth very high, although his body be not seen, yet with his neere brightnesse he doth lighten the parts next unto him. But about the solstice there be no nights at all, by reason that hee being then more apparent, not onely casteth bright beames from him, but sheweth also the grea∣test part of himselfe. Above these Ilands the sea is tearmed, The frozen sea, or Cronium The slow, frozen, and Icie sea ; for that it is so rough by occasion of heaps of Ice, and scarce navigable. It is also named of ancient writers CRONIUM, or Cronian sea, of Saturne ; because here in a British Iland, as Plutarch recordeth, there goeth a tale, how Saturne is kept sleeping in a deepe cave, or bottome of a golden pumish stone: that he is by Jupiter cast into a most deepe and dead sleepe, which serveth in stead of bonds: that birds bring him Ambrosia the divine meat, with the odoriferous smell wherof all the place is perfumed. Also that he hath many spirits or daemones attending upon him as servi∣tours, who reverence him, serve him, and attend upon him. By which pretty fable, (unlesse I be deceived) is covertly couched by a Mythiology, that there lye hidden in these Ilands, veines or mines of Metals, over which Saturne is president: which not∣withstanding are forlet and out of request, for want of wood to maintaine the for∣naces. Now beneath Thule Southward, the German sea spreadeth it selfe wide, wherein, as Pliny affirmeth, there lye dispersed the seven ACMODAE, Mela tearmeth them HAEMODES: But seeing it is knowne for certaine, that these be Ilands belonging to Denmarke in the Codan Gulfe, namely, Zeland, Fuynen, Lagland, Muen, Falstor, Lay∣land, and Femerem, there is no cause wherefore I should say any more; neither of the Isle GLESSARIA or ELECTRIDA, so called of Amber cast up there out of the Sea: which Sotacus supposed to drop forth of trees in Britain. But seeing that the an∣cient Germans called Amber Glesse, willing enough I am to thinke with that most learned man, Erasmus Michael Laetus, that the Iland Lesse, hard by Scagen, or Pro∣montory of Denmark, was in times past called GLESSARIA. Now within the Ger∣man sea on that side where it beateth upon Britaine, appeare very few Ilands, un∣lesse they be those that lye in Edenburrough Frith, namely, May, Basse, Keth, and Inche Colme, that is, Columbs Isle. On the coast of Northumberland, over against the river Lied, Lindis-farne. one sheweth it selfe, namely Lindis-farn: the Britans call it Inis Medicante, which, that I may use Bedes words, as the sea ebbeth and floweth at his tides, is twice a day inundated and compassed about with water in maner of an Iland, and twice likewise made continent to the land, as the shore is laid bare again: whereupon he aptly termed it a Demy Iland. The West part of it being the narrower, and left unto conies, joineth to the East side by a very small spange of land: and this part which bendeth toward the South is much broader, having a pretty towne in it, with a Church and a castle: where sometimes had beene that Episcopall See, which Aidan the Scot (called thi∣ther to preach the Christian faith unto the people of Northumberland) instituted, as being much delighted with the solitary situation, as a most fit place of retire. In this small Iland there sat eleven Bishops. But afterwards when the Danes rifled and rob∣bed all the Sea-coasts, the Episcopall See was translated to Durham. Under the towne there is a good commodious haven, defended with a Block-house situate upon an hill toward the South-East. Holy Iland. This, for the habitation therein of holy Monkes, is called in English Holy Iland. Concerning which Alcuin, in an Epistle unto Egelred King of Northumberland, wri∣teth thus. A place more venerable than all the places in Britaine, is left to the spoile of Pagans and Miscreants: and where after the departure of S. Paulinus from York, Chri∣stian religion in our nation first began, there it hath felt the first beginning of misery and calamity. Farn Isle. Seven miles from hence South-Eastward, Farn Isle sheweth it selfe, distant al∣most two miles from Banborrow castle, enclosed within the most deep Ocean, and en∣circled about with craggy cliffs, and this hath also in the middle well neere, a Fort be∣longing unto it; even in that place, as the report goeth, where Cuthbert Bishop of Lin∣disfarn, that tutelar St. and Patron of the Northren Englishmen, to the end he might wholly give himselfe to the service of God, Bede in the life of Cuthbert. built, as Bede saith in his life, a city fitting his government, and erected houses in this city, sorting well therto. For the whole building stood almost round in compasse, reaching from wall to wall the space of foure or five per∣ches. The wall it selfe on the coast side was more than a mans height: for on the inside with hewing downe into a mighty rocke he had made it far higher, sufficient to with-hold and keep in the wanton lasciviousnesse either of eyes or thoughts, and to elevate the whole intention of the mind up to heavenly desires, in such sort as that the devout inhabitants thereof could out of his mansion place behold nothing but the heaven. Which wall verily he made not of cut squared stone, or of bricke; nor laid the same with strong morter, but rai∣sed altogether of coble and unpolished rough stones, and turfe betweene, which with dig∣ging he had taken out of the midst of the place. Of which stones verily some were of that huge bignesse, as foure men were uneth able to lift one of them. Within this mansion hee had two houses, a Chappell, and a dwelling roome for common uses. The walls whereof he brought up of very naturall earth, by digging much of it within and without round about, or else by paring it up. And roofes over them of timber without all forme, and straw there∣upon. Moreover, at the haven of this Iland there stood a greater house, wherein the bre∣thren that came to visit him might be entertained and lodged, and not far from it a foun∣tain meet for their uses. Upon this there adjoine other smaller Ilands toward the North, as Widopens, Staple Iland, which lieth two miles off, Bronsman, and two lesser than these, which they call the Wambes. After these the Iland commonly called Coquet lieth right before the mouth of the river Coquet, wherein is a plentifull veine of Sea-coale. Neither are there any more Ilands to be seen in this coast: but over against it be the Saxonum Insulae, that is, The Saxons Ilands, now called Heilich lant, that is, The Holy-Ilands, Saxon Ilands. and they lie, as it were, in a continued range along East and West Frislands: Among which that was best knowne unto the Roman Captaines which Strabo called BIRCHANIS, Lib. 7. Birchanis. Pliny BIRCHANA, and the Romans FABARIA, of the resemblance of a certain Graine or Pulse comming up there of the owne accord: which that I may restore it againe to the due place (although it bee nothing pertinent to my purpose) the very name it selfe witnesseth to bee that Borkun which lieth over against the mouth of Ems. Borkun. Somewhat lower upon the shore of Holland, The British Armory or Store-house. where in ancient time was the mouth of Rhene, the foundations of a most ancient Store-house, Magazin or Armo∣ry, are covered over with the waves, which being very seldome discovered and laide bare at a low ebbe of the Ocean, sheweth both an admirable spectacle of reverend an∣tiquitie, and also a most noble modell and forme of building; which, Abraham Orte∣lius, the repairer of ancient Geography, and my entire and inward friend, hath preser∣ved out of the maine Ocean by his exact description thereof. Holland coast Britten huis. I have mentioned this the more willingly, because the Hollanders call it in their language Huis te Britten, that is, the British house, so that it belongeth at least wise in name to Britain, and ther∣fore not impertinent to my purpose. For as it is evident and confessed of all, that the Emperour C. Caligula, when he entended the conquest of Britaine, in that ridiculous voiage of his, built it for a watch-tower: so an ancient Inscription there digged up doth testifie, that the Emperor Septimius Severus, after it was fallen to decay rebuilt it. But whence it was named Britten, let him tell that best can ghesse. Probable it is that it tooke this name from the Britans: for that Bretta the natall place of Philip Melanchthon tooke name of the Britans, he himselfe was fully perswaded: and that Mounts in Heinault were of the Britans termed Breten, we have read elsewhere. But yet (that I may speake as Plinie doth) seeing he marvelleth why the Herbe that is pe∣culiar unto Holland, as growing no where else, is called Britannica, unlesse perhaps those that bordered upon the Ocean dedicated it unto Britain so neere unto it: so for my part I wonder as much, why this tower should be termed Britannica, or Breten, un∣lesse the Hollanders consecrated it to our Britaine, lying opposite unto it. Pliny cal∣leth a place in Picardy, Portus Mori∣norum Britan¦nicus. Portum Morinorum Britannicum, that is, The British haven or port of the Morines, either for that they took ship there to passe over into Britain, or because it kenned Britaine over against it on the other side of the sea. Why then should not this tower by the same reason be called Britannica or Breten? for that the Britans often arrived here, and that from hence out of Germany there was a com∣mon passage into Britain, it is most certain; considering that Zosimus hath given the just measure of the sea betwixt Britaine and this mouth of Rheine, The Chamavi dwelt thereby, as appeareth out of the Em∣bassages of Eunapius. to be 900. Stadia over, as though it had beene an usuall passage: and written beside, that corne was wont to be brought by ships out of Britaine to this place, and from thence with bar∣ges and boats haled up the Rhene against the streame to serve the Roman garrisons: seeing that Iulian the Emperour built garrisons, as Marcellinus saith, wherein might be inned and kept the corne that the Britans usually transported thither. At which time this said Armory may seeme to have beene converted into a Garner or Store-house for corne, and of the said British corne tearmed Britanni∣cum: and so much the rather, because in the old Records of Holland, wee finde it written Brittanburg: for that age termed castles standing commodiously, and such as were stored with plenty of corne, Burgus what it is. Burghs, as we read in the history of the Burgun∣dians. Moreover, what if the Britans (that in this doubtfull matter I may run out of one conjecture to another) sometimes held it in their owne hands, and so adopted it into their owne name? considering they invested Magnus Maximus, whom some name Clemens Maximus, in the purple robe, and proclaimed him Emperour against Gratian. For he arrived at this mouth of Rhene. If againe, it had not as yet taken this name Britannicum, what if the Saxons tearmed it Huis te Britten, for that they tooke ship from hence into Britain, when they annoied our shores with their Cyules? for so they tearmed their pinnaces or Brigantines. Zosimus l. 4. Saxons in Hol∣land. Janus Douza in his Nomen∣clator. Verily Zosimus sheweth that the Sax∣ons, after they had driven out the Frankers called Salii, planted themselves in Bata∣via, that is, Holland: and that from thence they put over by multitudes into Britain, it is most cleere and evident. Which also as I said before, Ianus Douza, a noble Gen∣tleman indeed, and passing well learned, in his Ode of Leyden seemeth to imply: yet here againe, lest I might seeme too forward and lavish in setting forth the glory of Britaine; considering that the right learned Hadrian Iunius, borne and bred in Hol∣land, hath fetched the originall of the herbe Britannica from Britten a word of his owne country, Britten an herb. because it groweth plentifully upon those turfes which they call Brit∣ten, and whereof they raise great bankes and dikes against the violence of the encro∣ching Ocean; it will be no absurdity if one should reduce this Huis te Britten, unto the same originall: and suppose it to have been so called, because it was fensed with banks of turfe, or of Britten, set opposite against the forcible surges of the waves; which when the surges of the sea had once pierced and overthrowne, it may seeme to have borne downe this house also. But let them see to these matters who have a deeper in∣sight into the nature of the word, and the situation of the place, and pardon me with∣all, if here I have thrust my sickle into anothers harvest. Zeland. See pag. 333. & 441. Toliapis. Caunus. Canvey. See in Essex, Shepey. In that coast there be also Isles of Zeland compassed about with the rivers Scaldt, Maese, and the Ocean: Touching which I will onely adde thus much, that the name of Valachria (for of these this is the chiefe) as Lemnius Levinus conjectureth, came from our Welshmen. Over against Zeland, Tamis the goodliest and noblest river of Britain dischargeth himself into the sea: in which place Ptolomee setteth TOLIAPIS and CAUNA, or CONVENNON. Of Toliapis, which I suppose to be Shepey, see in Kent. Of Convennos I have spoken in Essex in the page 441. More Eastward without Tamis mouth, there lieth along before the Iland Tenet, a place full of shelves and sands, and very dangerous for saylers, which they call Good∣wins sands, Goodwin Sands. where our Annales doe record that in the yeere 1097. an Iland which was the patrimony of Goodwin Earle of Kent, was quite swallowed up and sunk in the sea: concerning which John Twin writeth thus. This land was very fruitfull, and full of plenteous pastures, lying somewhat lower and more flat than Tenet; out of which there was a passage by boat or barge three or foure miles long. Some call it Lomea. This Iland in an unusuall tempest of windes, and boisterous fury of stormy raines, and uncooth rage of the sea, was drowned, and lieth overwhelmed with sand cast up after an incredible manner, and with∣out all recovery is turned into a middle or doubtfull nature of land and sea. For I wot wel what I say, because one while it wholly floateth, and another while at a low water after an ebbe, it beareth walkers upon it. Haply this is Toliapis, unlesse you had rather read Thanatos, for Toliapis, and in some copies we read it Toliatis, of which we have trea∣ted in Kent. See the 345. page. In this very place, the huge vastnesse of the sea gathereth into such a straight, that the gullet of the Ocean betweene the firme land of France and Britaine, is not above thirty miles over, The British narrow sea. which Streights some call the Narrow sea of Britaine, others of France (and the bound it is of the British sea) which by little and little removeth the shores farther asunder, that were in manner meeting together, and by the driving backe of the lands on both sides equally, floweth between Britaine and France from East to West. At this beginneth the British sea : wherein first you meet with the I∣land, or byland rather, Selsy ; in the English Saxon tongue, , that is, according to Bede, The Iland of Sea-calves, which in our tongue we call otherwise Seales. But hereof I have spoken already in the page 308. Somewhat higher lieth the Isle Vecta, in the British tongue Guith, in the Saxon, , and , for the Saxons tearmed an Iland , wee The Isle of Wight, and Whight. Whereof also I have written before in the 273. page. Of Portland likewise, which now is no Iland, but annexed to the continent, I have treated heretofore in Dorsetshire in the page 210. Hence will I cut over to the shore of France just against it; where from Beer-fleet in Normandy unto the midst of the Channell, the sea, by the Mariners saying, is pa∣ved, as it were, and overspred with rocks and cragges: among which, William sonne to King Henry the first, and heire both of England and of Normandy, whiles he cros∣sed the seas out of Normandy into England, in the yeere of salvation 1120. was by woefull shipwracke, together with his sister, his base brother, and others of the floure of the nobility, drowned. Whereupon a Poet of that age thus versified. Abstulit hunc terrae matri maris unda noverca, Proh dolor! occubuit Sol Anglicus, Anglia plora: Quae{que} priùs fueras gemino radiata nitore, Extincto nato vivas contenta parente. Him, from the land his mother kind, the Sea a stepdame caught; Now Englands Sunne, alas, is set: weepe England, weep for thought: And thou that didst enjoy the beames of twofold light before, Since Sonne is gone, content thy selfe with father and no more. Funus plangendum, privat lapis aequoris unus, Et ratis una suo principe regnaduo. O dolefull day, one rocke in Ocean maine, One barke of Prince bereaveth kingdomes twaine. And another Poet at the same time hammered out these verses touching that ship∣wracke. Dum Normannigenae Gallis claris superatis, Anglica regna petunt, obstitit ipse Deus: Aspera nam fragili dum sulcant aequora cymba, Intulit excito nubila densa mari. Dumque vagi caeco rapiuntur tramite nautae, Ruperunt imas abdita saxa rates. Sic mare dum superans tabulata per ultima serpit, Mersit rege satos, occidit orbis honos. Whiles Normans after victories of Noble Frenchmen won, Make saile for England, God himselfe withstood them all anon. For as the rough and surging waves they cut with brittle barke, He brought upon the troubled sea thicke fogges and weather darke▪ Whiles sailers then in coasts unknowne were driven and hal'd astray, Upon blind rockes their ships were split and quickly cast away. Thus when salt water entred in, and upmost hatches caught, Drown'd was that royall progeny, worlds honour came to naught. More Westward, certaine Ilands affront France, yet under the Crowne of Eng∣land: and first of all upon the coast of Normandy, or the Lexobii (whom our Britans or Welshmen tearme Lettaw, as one would say Littorales, that is, Coast-men ) lieth Alderney, Alderney. which in the Records is named Aurney, Aureney, and Aurigney: so that it may seeme to be that ARICA, which in Antonine, according to the King of Spaines copie, is reckoned among the Isles of the British sea. Others hold it to be that EBO∣DIA, or EVODIA, whereof Paulus Diaconus only hath made mention, who had small skill of this coast; which he placeth thirty miles from the shore of Seine, and telleth of a rumbling & roaring noise of waters, falling into a gulfe or Charybdis, that is heard a far off. This Alderney lieth in the chiefe trade of all shipping passing from the Ea∣sterne parts to the West: three leagues distant from the coast of Normandy, thirty from the nearest part of England, extended from South East to the North West, and containeth about eight miles in circuit, the South shore consisting of high cliffes. The aire is healthfull, the soile sufficiently rich, full of fresh pastures and corn-fields: yet the inhabitants poore, through a custome of parting their lands into small parcells by Gavelkind. The towne is situate well neere in the midst of the Isle, having a parish Church, and about 80. families, with an harbour called Crabbic some mile off. On the East side there is an ancient fort, and a dwelling house built at the charge of the Chamberlans: for the fee farme of the Isle was granted by Queene Elizabeth to G. Chamberlane, son to Sir Leonard Chamberlane of Shirburne in Oxfordshire, when he recovered it from the French. And under this fort, the sand with violent drifts from the Northwest overlaied the land, so that now it serveth thereabout most for conies. I know not whether I were best to relate of a Giants tooth, one of the grinders, which was found in this Iland, of that bigge size that it equalled a mans fist; seeing Saint Augustine writeth of one that himselfe saw, so bigge, that if it were cut in small peeces to the proportion of our teeth, it seemed it might have made an hundred of them. Hence Westward there runneth out a craggy ridge of rockes, which have their severall eddies, Casquettes. and therefore feared of the Mariners, who tearme them Cas∣quettes. Out of one of the which properly named Casquet, there gusheth a most sweet spring of fresh water, to the great comfort of the Iland-fishermen beating up and downe hereabout. At these, to remember incidently (that the memorie of a well-deserving Patriot may not perish) the fleet which Iohn Philipot Citizen of London set forth and manned at his owne private charges, had a glori∣ous victorie over a rabble of Pirates, who impeached all trafficke, taking their Cap∣taine, and fifteene Spanish ships that consorted with them. Which worthy man also maintained 1000. souldiers at his owne pay for defence of the Realme against the French, who sore infested the Southern coast in the beginning of the reigne of King Richard the second, to omit his great loanes to the King, and other good and laudable offices to his country. Under these lieth Southward CAESAREA, whereof Antonine hath written, scarce twelve miles distant from Alderney, which name the French∣men now have clipped so short, as the Spaniards have CAESAR AUGUSTA in Spaine: Gerzey. for they call it Gearzey, like as Cherburgh for Caesarisburgus, and Saragose for Caesar augusta. Gregorius Turonensis calleth it, the Iland of the sea that lieth to the City Constantia, where hee reporteth how Pratextatus Bishop of Roan was confined hi∣ther: like as Papirius Massonius tearmeth it, the Isle of the coast of Constantia, because it butteth just upon the ancient city Constantia, which may seeme in Ammianus to be named CASTRA CONSTANTIA, Castra Con∣stantia. Moritavum. and in the foregoing ages Moritonium. For Robert Montensis writeth thus: Comes Moritonii, id est, Constantiarum, if that be not a glosse of the transcriber. For Moritonium, which now is Mortaigne, is farther di∣stant from the sea. This Isle is thirty miles or thereabout in compasse, fenced with rockes and shelves, which are shallow places, dangerous for such as saile that way. The ground is fertile enough; bearing plenty of sundry sorts of corne, and breeding cattaile of divers kindes, but sheepe especially, and most of them with faire heads, carrying foure hornes a peece. The aire is very wholsome and healthy, not subject to any other dis∣eases but agues in September, which thereupon they tearme Settembers, so that there is no being for Physicians here. And for that it is scarce of fuell, in steed of fire wood they use a kind of Sea weed which they call Uraic, Uraic. Fucus marinus. deemed to be that Fu∣cus marinus, which Plinie mentioneth, and groweth every where about in craggy I∣lands, and on rockes most plenteously. This being dried at the fire, serveth for to burne; with the ashes whereof (as it were with Marle and the fat of the earth) they dung commonly their fields and fallows, and thereby make them very battle & fruit∣full. Neither are they permitted to gather it but in the spring and summer season; and then upon certaine daies appointed by the Magistrate. At which time, with a certaine festivall mirth, they repaire in numbers from all parts to the shore with their carres, as also to the rockes neere unto them they speed themselves a vie with their fisher-boats. But whatsoever of this kind the sea casteth up, the poore may gather for their owne use. The inward parts of the Isle gently rise and swell up with pretty hills: under which lye pleasant vallies watered with riverets, and planted with fruit∣full trees, but apple trees especially, of which they make a kind of drinke. Well stored it is with farme places and villages, having within it twelve Parishes, and furnished on every side with creekes and commodious rodes: among which the safest is that in the South part of the Isle, betweene the two little townes, Saint Hilaries and Saint Albans: which harbour hath also a little Iland belonging to it, fortified with a gari∣son, having no way of accesse unto it: wherein, by report, Saint Hilarie Bishop of Poictiers, after he had beene banished hither, was enterred. For the towne dedica∣ted to his name just over against this Iland is accounted the principall towne, both in regard of the mercate and trafficke there, as also of the Court of Justice which is there established. On the East-side, where it faceth the citie Constantia, there is sea∣ted upon a steep rocke a most strong castle, with an haughty name called Mont Or∣gueil, which is much beholden unto King Henry the fifth, who repaired it. The Go∣vernour of the Isle is Captain thereof, who in times past was called the Custos of the Isle, and in Henry the third his reigne had a yeerely pension of 200. pound. On the South side, but with longer distance betweene, Saint Malo is to be seene, having ta∣ken that new name of Maclou a very devout man, where before time it was called the city Diablintum, and in the ancient Notice, ALETUM: for in a Manuscript of Isi∣dor Mercator, we read thus in expresse termes, Civitas Diablintum &c. that is, the city Diablintum, which by another name is called Aletum. As for the inhabitants, they fresh∣ly practice the feat of fishing, but give their minds especially to husbandry: and the women make a very gainfull trade by knitting of hose, which they call Iarsey Stockes or Stockings. As touching the politicke state thereof, a Governour sent from the King of Eng∣land is the chiefe Magistrate: hee appointeth a Bailiffe, who together with twelve Jurats or sworne Assistants, and those chosen out of the twelve severall parishes, by the voices of the Parishioners, sitteth to minister justice in Civill causes: in criminall matters he sitteth but with seven of the said sworne assistants, and in causes of consci∣ence to be decided by equity and reason with three. Twenty miles hence North-west, lieth another Iland, which Antonine the Empe∣rour in ancient time named SARNIA, we at this day Garnsey, Sarnia. Garnsey. Haply Granon by, a transposi∣tion of letters which the N titia placeth i the Tract of Armorica. Smyris. lying out East and West in fashion of an harpe, neither in greatnesse nor in fruitfulnesse comparable to Iersey ; for it hath in it only ten parishes, yet is this to be preferred before it, because it fostereth no venemous thing therin, like as the other doth. It is also better fortified by naturall fenses, as being enclosed round with a set of steepe rockes, among which is found that most hard and sharpe stone Smyris (which we terme Emerill ) wherewith Goldsmiths and Lapidaries clense, burnish, and cut their precious stones, and glaziers also divide and cleave their glasse. Likewise it is of greater name for the commodious∣nesse of the haven, and the concourse of merchants resorting thither. For in the far∣thest part well neere Eastward, but on the South side, it admitteth an haven within an hollow Bay bending inward like an halfe Moone, able to receive tall ships; upon which standeth Saint Peters, a little towne built with a long and narrow street, well stored with warlike munition, and ever as any warre is toward mightily repleni∣shed with Merchants. For by an ancient priviledge of the Kings of England, here is alwaies a continuall truce, as it were: and lawfull it is for Frenchmen and others, how hot soever the warre is, to have repaire hither too and fro without danger, and to maintain entercourse of trafficke in security. The entry of the haven, which is rockie, is fortified on both sides with castles. On the left hand there is an ancient bulwarke or block-house, and on the right hand over against it standeth another (called Cornet ) upon an high rocke, and the same at every high water compassed about with the sea. Which in Queene Maries daies, Sir Leonard Chamberlane Governour of the Iland, as also under Queene Elizabeth, Sir Thomas Leighton his successour, caused to bee fortified with new workes. For here lieth for the most part the Governour of the Iland, and the Garrison souldiers: who will in no hand suffer Frenchmen and women to enter in. On the North side there is La-vall, a biland adjoining unto it, which had belonging thereto a covent of religious persons, or a Priory. On the West part neere unto the sea, there is a lake, that taketh up a mile and halfe in com∣passe, replenished with fish, but Carpes especially, which for bignesse and pleasant taste are right commendable. The inhabitants are nothing so industrious in tilling of the ground as those of Iarsey, but in navigation and trafficke of merchandise, for a more uncertaine gaine they be very painfull. Every man by himselfe loveth to hus∣band his owne land, so that the whole Iland lieth in severall, and is divided by enclo∣sures into sundry parcels: which they find not onely profitable to themselves, but al∣so a matter of strength against the enemie. Both Ilands smile right pleasantly upon you, with much variety of greene gardens and orchards: by meanes whereof, they use for the most part a kinde of wine made of apples, which some call Sisera, and we Sydre. The inhabitants in both places are by their first originall either Normans or Britans, and speake French: yet disdaine they to be either reputed or named French, and can very well be content to be called English. In both Ilands likewise they burne Uraic for their fuell, or else sea-coals brought out of England: and in both places they have wonderfull store of fish, and the same manner of civill government. These Ilands, with others lying about them, belonged in old time to the Dukedom of Normandy, Normandy lost. but when as Henry the first King of England had vanquished his brother Robert, in the yeere of our Lord 1108. he annexed that Dukedom, and these Ilands unto the kingdome of England. Since which time they have continued firme in loialtie unto England, even when John King of England being endited for mur∣dering Arthur his Nephew, was by a definitive sentence or arrest of confiscation, de∣prived of his right in Normandy, which he held in chiefe of the French King: yea moreover when the French had seized upon these Isles, hee through the faithfull affection of the people twice recovered them. Neither revolted they when Henry the third King of England had, for a summe of money, surrendred his whole interest and right in Normandy. And ever since they have, with great commendation of their constancy, persisted faithfull unto the Crowne of England, and are the onely remaines that the Kings of England have of the ancient inheritance of William the Conquerour, and of the Dutchy of Normandy: although the French other∣whiles have set upon them, who from the neighbour coast of France have hardly this long time endured to see them appertaine not to France but to England. And verily Evan, a Welsh Gentleman, descended from the Princes of Wales, and serving the French King, Tillet. surprized Garnesey in the time of King Edward the third: but soone lost it. And also in the reigne of King Edward the fourth, as appeareth by the records of the Realme, they seized upon the same: but through the valour of Richard Harleston, valect of the Crowne (for so they termed him in those daies) they were shortly disseized; and the King, in recompence of his valorous service, gave unto him the Captainship both of the Iland and of the castle. And in the yeere 1549. when England, under King Edward the sixth a child, was distressed with domesticall trou∣bles, Leo Strozzi Captaine of the French Gallies gave the attempt to invade it, but with the losse of many of his men had the foile, and desisted from his enterprise. As touching the Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, they were under the Bishop of Con∣stance in Normandy, untill that hee in our remembrance refused to abjure the Popes authority in England (as our Bishops doe). Since which time they were by Queene Elizabeth severed from the Diocesse of Constance, and united for ever to the Dio∣cesse of Winchester, so as the Bishop of Winchester and his successours execute e∣very thing appertaining to the Episcopall jurisdiction: yet their Ecclesiasticall disci∣pline is conformable to the Church of Geneva, which the French Ministers have brought in. As for the civill customes of these Ilands, I could now note some of them out of the Kings records: namely, How King Iohn instituted twelve Coroners sworn to keepe the pleas and rights belonging to the Crowne, and granted for the security of the I∣landers, that the Bailiffe henceforth by advice of the Coroners, might plead without writ of a new disseisin made within the yeere, of the death of any ancestours and predecessours within a yeere, of dowry likewise within a yeere, &c. Moreover, that the said Iuries may not delay their judgements beyond the tearme of one yeere: likewise that in Customes and other things they should be dealt withall, as naturall inborn inhabitants, and not as stran∣gers or forrainers. But these points I think good to leave unto others, who may search more curiously into particulars. Generally, the customes of Normandy take place here in most cases. Touching Serke, Serke. a little Iland that lieth betweene these above named, walled a∣bout, as it were, with mighty steepe rockes, in which I. de S. Owen of Iarsey (whose antiquity of descent some avouch (I know not upon what credit and authority) from before Saint Owens time) by commission from Queene Elizabeth, and for his owne commodity, as the report goeth, made a plantation, whereas before time it lay de∣solate. As touching Iethow, which for the use of the Governour of Garnsey serveth in steed of a parke, to feed cattell, to keepe Deere, conies, and phesants: as also tou∣ching Arme, which being larger than the other, was first a solitary place for Regular Chanons, and after for the Franciscan Friers; seeing they are not mentioned by the old writers, I have no reason to speake much of them. After these, upon the same coast, LIGA, whereof Antonine maketh mention, shooteth up his head, which retaineth the name still, and is now called Ligon. Then lye there spread and scattered seven Ilands, termed by Antonine SIADAE, of the num∣ber: for Saith in the British tongue betokeneth seven; which the Frenchmen at this day terme Le set Isles. Set-Iles. And I suppose these Siades to be corruptly called Hiadatae by Strabo: for from these, as hee saith, it is not a daies sailing into the Iland of Britaine. From these SIADAE to BARSA, Barsa. whereof Antonine also hath made mention, there is the distance of seven furlongs. The Frenchmen call it the Isle de Bas, and the English Basepole: Basepole. For the Britans tearme that Bas which is shallow, and the Mari∣ners by sounding finde the sea in this place to bee more ebbe and shallow: as which lieth not above seven or eight fathomes deepe: whereas along all the shore beside, the sea carrieth 12.18. and twenty fathoms of water, as we may see in their Hydro∣graphicall cards. Where the British sea is deepest. Howbeit betweene these Ilands and Foy in Cornwall this our British sea, as Mariners have observed, is of a mighty depth, which they measure to be in the channell fifty eight fathoms deepe, or thereabout. From hence I will now cut over to the coasts of our owne Britaine, and keeping along the shore, as I passe by Ideston, Moushole, and Longships (which be rather infamous and dangerous rocks than Ilands) at the very utmost point of Cornwall, lieth Antonines LISIA, now called of them that dwell thereby Lethowsow, but of others The Gulfe, seene onely at a low water when the tide is returned. Lisia by trans∣position of le¦ters Silia. I take this to be that Lisia which ancient writers doe mention; because Lis (as I have heard among our Britans in Wales) signifieth the same. For Lis soundeth as much as to make a noise with a great rumbling or roa∣ring, such as commonly we heare in Whirlepits: and in that place the current or tide of the Ocean striveth amaine with a mighty noise both Northward and Eastward to get out, as being restrained and pent in, betweene Cornwall and the Ilands which Antonine calleth SIGDELES, Sulpitius Severus SILLINAE, Solinus SILURES, English∣men Silly, the low country Sea-men Sorlings, and the ancient Greeke writers tearme HESPERIDES and CASSITERIDES. For Dionisius Alexandrinu named them He∣sperides of their Westerne situation, in these verses. — . Which Priscian translated thus: Sed Sacrum Pro∣montorium. summam contra Sacram cognomine dicunt, Quam caput Europae, sunt stanni pondere plenae Hesperides, populus tenuit quas fortis Iberi. Which may be englished thus. Now just beneath that Isle which Sacred, High, And head of Europe men are wont to call, The Ilands nam'd Hesperides do lie, And those well stor'd with Tin, a rich metall. But would ye know the people? then note well, The glorious wealthy Spaniards therein dwell. These also Festus Avienus, in his poeme entituled Orae Maritimae, that is, The sea coasts, called Ostrymnides: touching which he inserted these verses, as they are found in the Paris edition, and the notes upon the same. In quo insulae sese exerunt Oestrymnides Non usque na∣vibus, we read in the notes of Paris. Laxe jacentes, & metallo divites Stanni at que plumbi: multa vis his gentis est, Superbus animus, efficax solertia, Negotiandi cura jugis omnibus Nolusque cumbis turbidum late fretum Et belluosi gurgitem Oceani secant; Non hi carinas quippe pinu texere Facere morem non abiete, ut usus est, Curvant phasello: sed rei ad miraculum Navigia junctis semper aptant pellibus, Corioque vastum saepe per currunt salum. Wherein the Isles Oestrymnides doe spread, And shew themselves broad lying all about, In metals rich as well of tin as lead: The people strong, their stomacks high and stout, Active and quicke, fresh merchants all throughout: No troublous waves in Frith or Ocean maine, Of monsters full, with ships cut they in twaine. For why? no skill at all have they to frame, Of Pine tree keels for barke or gallion: Nor know they how to make oares to the same, Of fyrre or maple wood, where sailes are none, As others use: But which is wonder one, Of stitched hides they all their vessels make, And oft through sea in leather, voiage take. Like vessels unto which were used in this our sea, in the yeere of salvation 914. For we read of certaine devout men, that in a Carab (or carogh) made of two tanned hides onely and an halfe, sailed out of Ireland into Cornwall. Afterwards also of the said Ilands the same Avienus wrote thus: Tartesiisque in terminos Oestrymnidum Negotiandi mos erat, Carthagini Etiam colonis. Those of Tartessus eke, as well As they in Carthage towne that dwell, Were wont to trade for merchandise, To skirts of Isles Oestrymnides. Other Greeke writers tearmed these Cassiterides, of Tinne: like as Strabo nameth a certaine place among the Drangi in Asia, CASSITERON, of Tinn: and Stephanus in his booke of Cities, reporteth out of Dionysius, that a certaine Iland in the Indian sea was called CASSITERIA, of Tinne. As for that MICTIS, which Pliny citeth out of Timaeus, to bee sixe dayes sailing inward from Britaine, and to yeeld Mines of white lead; that it should be one of these, I dare scarcely affirme. Yet am I not ig∣rant, that the most learned Hermolaus Barbarus read it in manuscript books, Mitteris for Mictis, and doth read for Mitteris, Cartiteris. But that I should avouch these to be those CASSITERIDES so often sought for, the authority of the ancient writers, their site, and the mines of Tinne, are motives to perswade me. Full opposite unto the Ar∣tabri, saith Strabo (over against which the West parts of Britain doe lye) appeare those Ilands Northward which they call Cassiterides, placed after a sort in the same clime with Britaine. And in another place: The sea between Spaine and the Cassiterides is broader than that which lieth between the Cassiterides and Britain. The Cassiterides look toward the coast of Celtiberia, saith Solinus: And Diodorus Siculus, in the Ilands next unto the Spanish sea, which of Tinne are called Cassiterides. Also Eustathius, There be ten Islands called Cassiterides lying close together Northward. Now, seeing these Isles of Silly are opposite unto the Artabri, that is, Gallitia in Spaine, seeing they bend direct∣ly North from them, seeing they are placed in the same clime with Britaine, seeing they looke toward the coast of Celtiberia, seeing they are dis-joined by a farre broa∣der sea from Spaine than from Britaine, seeing they are next unto the Spanish sea, seeing they lye hard one by another toward the North, and ten onely of them bee of any good account, namely, Saint Maries, Annoth, Agnes, Sampson, Silly, Brefer, Rusco or Trescaw, Saint Helens, Saint Martins, and Arthur, and that which is most materiall, seeing they have veines of Tinne, as no other Iland hath beside them in this tract, and considering that two of the lesse sort, to wit, Minan Witham, and Minuisi∣sand, may seeme to have taken their names of Mines, I would rather think these to be CASSITERIDES, than either the Azores, which beare too far West, or Cisarga with Olivarius, that lieth in maner close unto Spaine, or even Britain it selfe with Ortelius ; considering there were many Cassiterides ; and Dionysius Alexandrinus after he had treated of the Cassiterides, writeth of Britaine apart by it selfe. If any man by reason of the number deny these to be CASSITERIDES, for that they be more than ten, let him also number the Haebudes and the Orcades, and if after the account taken, he finde neither more nor fewer with Ptolomee than five Haebudes, and 30. Orcades, let him search in any other place but where they are now extant, and with all his searching by reckoning of the numbers, I know for certaine he shall not easily finde them. But the ancient writers had no certaine knowledge of these most remote parts and Ilands of the earth in that age, no more than wee in these daies of the Isles in the Streights of Magellane, and the whole tract of New Guiney. And that Herodotus had no knowledge of these, it is no marvell: for himselfe con∣fesseth that hee knew nothing for certaine, to make report of the farthest parts of Europe. But lead was brought first from hence into Greece. Lead, saith Plinie, in his eight Booke, and in the Chapter of the first Inventours of things, Midacritus first brought out of the Island Cassitiris. But as touching these Islands, listen what Stra∣bo saith in his third Booke of Geography, toward the end. The Ilands Cassiterides be in number ten, neere one unto another, situate in the deepe sea, Northward from the haven of the Artabri. One of them is desert, the rest are inhabited by men wearing blacke garments, clad in side-coats reaching downe to their ankles, girt about the breast, and going with staves, like unto the Furies in Tragedies. They live of their cattell, straggling and wandring after a sort, as having no certaine abiding place. Metall mines they have of tinne and of lead, in lieu whereof and of skins and furres they receive by exchange from the Merchants, earthen vessels, salt, and brasen workes. At the be∣ginning the Phoenicians only traded thither from Gades, and concealed from others this their navigation. But when the Romanes followed a certaine Master of a shippe (that they themselves might learne this trafficke of merchandise) he, upon a spitefull envie, ran his ship for the nonce upon the sands; and after hee had brought them that followed after into the same danger of destruction, himselfe escaped the shipwracke, and out of the common Treasury received the worth of the commodities and wares that he lost. Howbeit the Romans, after they had tryed many times, learned at length the voiage hither. Afterwards Publius Crassus when hee had sailed thither, and seene how they digged not very deepe in these Mines, and that the people were lovers of peace and lived quietly, desirous also to saile up∣on the sea, he shewed the feat thereof to as many as were willing to learne: although they were to saile a greater sea than that which reacheth from thence to Britain. But to discourse no farther whether these were the ancient Cassiterides or no, and to returne to Silly. There bee about an hundred forty and five Ilands carrying this name, all clad with grasse, or covered with a greenish mosse, besides many hideous rockes, and great craggy stones raising head above water, situate as it were in a cir∣cle round, eight leagues from the lands end, or utmost point of Cornewall West-South-West. Some of them yeeld sufficient store of corne, but all of them have a∣bundance of conies, cranes, swannes, herons, and other sea-foule. The greatest of them all is that which tooke the name of Saint Marie, having a towne so named, and is about eight miles in compasse, offereth a good harbour to Saylers in a sandie Bay, wherein they may anchor at sixe, seven, and eight fathom; but in the entry lye some rockes on either side. It hath had anciently a castle, which hath yeelded to the force of time. But for the same Queene Elizabeth in the yeere 1593. when the Spaniards, called in by the Leaguers of France, began to nestle in little Britain, built a new castle with faire and strong ravelines, Stella Maria. and named the same Stella Maria, in re∣spect both of the ravelines, which resemble the raies of a starre, and the name of the Isle; for defence whereof shee there placed a garrison under the command of Sir Francis Godolphin. Doubtlesse these are those Ilands, which (as Solinus writeth) a troublous and rough narrow sea separateth by the space of two or three houres sailing from the coast of the Dan∣mony, and the inhabitants whereof observe the custome of ancient times. They have no faires nor mercates, and refuse mony; they give and take one thing for another, they pro∣vide themselves of necessaries by way of exchange, rather than by prising and giving of money, they serve the gods devoutly: both men and women will be counted wizzards, and skilfull in foretelling things to come. Eustathius out of Strabo termeth the inhabitants Melanchlanos, because they were clad in blacke garments reaching downe to the ankles: and as Sardus was perswaded, they depart out of this world for the most part so long livers, that they desire to live no longer. For from the top of a rocke (as he saith) they throw themselves into the sea, in hope of a more happy life: which doubtlesse was the perswasion of the Britain Druides. Hither also the Roman Emperours were wont to send persons condemned to work in the Mines. For Maximus the Emperour, when he had condemned Priscillanus to death for heresie, commanded his sectaries and disciples, Iustantius a Bishop of Spain, and Tiberianus, after their goods were confiscate, to be carried away into the Ilands of Sylly: and Marcus the Emperour banished him, that in the commotion of Cassius had prophesied and uttered many things, as it were by a divine instinct of the gods, into this Iland, as some are verily perswaded, who willingly for Syria Insula read Sy∣lia Insula, that is, The Isle of Silly, considering the Geographers as yet know no such Iland as Syria. Ulpian lib. 7. de Mathematicis. This confining or packing away of offendors into Ilands, was in those daies a kind of exile; and the Governours of Provinces might in that manner banish, if they had any Ilands under them: if not, they wrote unto the Emperour, that him∣selfe would assigne some Iland for the party condemned: neither was it lawfull with∣out the privity of the Prince to translate else whither, or to bury the body of him that was thus banished into an Iland. In the Writers of the middle time wee finde not so much as the name of these Ilands of Sylly, but onely that King Athelstane subdued them, and after his re∣turne built a Church in honour of S. Beriana or Buriena, in the utmost promontory Westward of Britaine, where he landed. Full against these on the French coast, Axantos. lyeth Plinies AXANTOS, an Isle right be∣fore the Osissimi, or Britaine Armorie, which keeping still the name whole, is called Ushant: Ushant. Antonine tearmeth it UXANTISSENA, in which one word two Ilands grew together, to wit, UXANTIS and SENA. For this Iland lieth somewhat lower, now called Sayn, Siambis. which butting full upon Brest, is named in some copies SIAMBIS, and of Pliny corruptly Sounos: about which from East to West, for seven miles to∣gether or thereabout, there shoot forth a number of rockes rather than Ilands, stand∣ing very thick together. Mariners cal it the Seame. Touching this Sain, take with you that which Pomponius Me∣la reporteth. SENA, saith he, lying in the British sea opposite unto the shores of the Osissi∣mi, is famous by reason of the Oracle of a French God, whose shee-Priests vowing perpe∣tuall virginity, are said to be nine in number: the Frenchmen call them Zenas or Lenas, ( for so read I with Turnebus, rather than Gallitenas) and men are of opinion, that they be∣ing endued with especiall endowments of nature, are able by enchantments to trouble the sea, and raise up windes▪ to turne themselves into what living creatures they list, to heale all those maladies, which with others are incurable, for to know also and to foretell things to come, &c. Beneath these there lie other Ilands in length, namely, Isles aux Motions, neere un∣to Pen-Mac, that is, the horsehead: Gleran over against old Blavic (which at this day is Blavet ) Grois and Bellisle, all which Pliny calleth VENETICAE. For they lye oppo∣site unto the Veneti in little Britaine, Veneti. Insulae Vene cae. Vannes. Venna Caro i. Charles Fi shing, as He gardus saith. Nesidae. who I wot not whether they were so named, as one would say, Fishermen: for Venna in the ancient language of the Galls seemeth to signifie so much. These Strabo supposeth to have been the founders and stockfathers of the Venetians in Italy: who writeth also, that they intended to have given Caesar battell at sea, when he minded the conquest of Britaine. These Ilands VENETICAE, some out of Dionysius Afer terme NESIDES, whereas in the Greek book we read , that is, the Tract of the Islands. Of which, Priscian out of him writeth thus; Nec spatio distant Nessidum littora longè, In quibus uxores Samnitum Amnitum Bacchica sacra Concelebrant hederae foliis, tectaeque corymbis. Non sic Bistonides Absynthi ad flumina Thraces, Exertis celebrant clamoribus . Nor distant farre from hence the shores doe lye Of Ilands, which Nessides many call, Wherein the wives of Amnites solemnly Concelebrate their high feasts Bacchanall With Ivie leaves and berries covered all. The Thracian dames make not so loud a cry, At Bacchus feast, the river Absynts by. Which Festus Avienus also hath expressed in these verses: Hinc spumosus item ponti liquor explicat aestum, Et brevis è pelago vortex subit: hic chorus ingens Poeminei coetus pulchri colit Orgia Bacchi, Producit noctem ludus sacer: aera pulsant Vocibus & crebris laiè sola calcibus urgent. Non sic Absynthi propè flumina Thraces, & almae Bistonides, non quà celeri ruit agmina Ganges, Indorum populi stata curant festa Lyaeo. From hence likewise the foaming sea displaies his swelling tide, And from the deep short whirle puffs rise. Here by the water side, A mighty sort of women meet, the feast of Bacchus faire To celebrate: their sacred sports last all night long. The aire Rings over head with voices shrill: and under foot, the ground With many a friske and stampe of theirs in dancing doth resound. Like noises make not Thracian Dames, the Biston wives, I say, Along Absynthus river, while they use to sport and play: Nor Indians neere swift Ganges streame farre in such frantick wise. Bacchus. What time to God Liaeus they their set feasts solemnize. Now that Bellisle is one of these foresaid Nessidae, the authority of Strabo, from the faithfull report of other, doth prove sufficiently. For it lieth before the mouth of the river Loire: and Ptolomee placed the SAMNITAE in a coast of France opposite unto it. For thus writeth Strabo. Moreover (they say) there is a little Iland in the Oce∣an, lying not far into the deep sea, full against the mouth of Ligeris: that in it inhabite the wives of the Samnitae, which are inspired with the instinct or divine power of Bacchus, and by ceremonies and sacrifices procure the favour of Bacchus: that no man commeth thither, but themselves taking their barkes saile away and company with their owne hus∣bands, and so returne againe into the Island. Also that a custome it is among them, to take away the roofe of their temple yeerly, and to cover it again the very same day before the sunne setteth; every one of the women bringing their burden: and look which of them letteth her burden fall, she is by the others torne in pieces: and that they gathering toge∣ther the pieces as they goe unto the temple, make not an end before they be out of this furi∣ous fit: and that it alwaies usually happeneth, that one of them by falling downe of her burthen is thus torne peecemeale. Thus old Authors, writing of the utmost parts of the world, took pleasure to insert pretty lyes and frivolous fables. But what things are reported of Ceres and Proserpine, they carry with them, saith he, more probability. For the report goeth of an Iland neere unto Britaine, where they sacrifice to these Goddesses after the same manner that they doe in Samothrace. Then follow the Isles aux Mottouns, Gleran, Grois, Belle-isle, upon the coast of little Britaine, Niermoustier, and L'isle de Dieu upon the coast of Poictou, and Lisle de Re, Islands full well knowne, and much frequented for the plenty that they yeeld of bay salt: but for as much as they are not once mentioned by the ancient Geographers, it may be sufficient for me that I have named them. Onely the next Island, at this day knowne by the name of Oleron, Oleron. Uliarus. was knowne to Pliny by the name of ULIARUS, which lieth, as he saith, in the Bay of Aquitaine, at the mouth of the river Charonton, now Charent, and had many immunities granted from the Kings of England, then Dukes of Aquitain. At which time it so flourished for marine discipline and glory, that these seas were governed by the lawes enacted in this Iland in the yeere 1266. no lesse than in old time the Mediterranean sea by the lawes of Rhodes. Lex Rhodia. Hitherto have I extended the British sea, both upon the credit of Pomponius Mela, who stretcheth it to the coast of Spaine; and upon the authority of the Lord Great Admirall of England, Admirall of England. which extendeth so far. For the Kings of England were, and are rightfull Lords of all the North and West sea-coasts of France (to say nothing of the whole kingdome and crowne of France) as who, to follow the tract of the sea-coast, wan the county of Guines, Hereditary territories in France belon∣ging to the Crowne of England. Merk, and Oye by the sword, were true heires to the county of Porithieu and Monstrevil by Eleanor the wife of King Edward the first, the onely heire thereof. In like maner most certain heires to the Dutchy of Normandy by King William the Conquerour, and thereby superiour Lords of Little Britaine dependant thereof; undoubted heires of the countries of Anjou, Tourain, and Maine, from King Henry the second, whose patrimony they were: likewise of the county of Poictou, and Dutchy of Aquitaine or Guyenne, by Eleanor the true heire of them, wife to the said Henry the second; to omit the counties of Tholouse, March, the homage of A∣vergne, &c. Of all which the French by their arrests of pretended forfaitures and con∣fiscations have disseized the crowne of England, and annexed them to the Crowne of France; taking advantage of our most unhappy civill dissentions: whereas in former ages the French Kings were so fore-closed by these territories, as they had no accesse at all to the Ocean. Nothing remaineth now, seeing my pen hath with much labour struggled and sai∣led at length out of so many blind shelves and shallowes of the Ocean, and craggy rocks of antiquity, save onely this, that as sea-men were wont in old time, to present Neptune with their torn sails, or some saved planks, according to their vow: so I also should consecrate some monument unto the ALMIGHTY and MOST GRACIOUS GOD, and to VENERABLE ANTIQUITY: which now right willingly and of duty I vow, and God willing in covenient time I will performe and make good my vow. Meane while I would have the Reader to remember, that I have in this worke wrastled with that envious and ravenous enemy TIME, of which the Greeke Poet sung very aptly in this note. , . , . Hore-headed TIME full slowly creeps, but as he slye doth walke, The voices he as slyely steales of people as they talke: Unseene himselfe, those that be seene he hides farre out of sight, And such againe as are not seene he bringeth forth to light. But I for my part am wont ever and anon to comfort my selfe with this Distichon of Mimnermus, which I know to be most true. , . Heart take thine ease, Men hard to please Thou haply maist offend: Though one speake ill Of thee, some will Say better, there an end. SOLI DEO GLORIA. PHILEMON HOLLAND THE TRANSLATOUR TO THE READER. I T is now almost thirty yeeres agone, since I enterprised the translation of this Master Cambdens worke, entituled Britannia : and it is full twenty sixe yeeres since it was prin∣ted in English. In which former Impression, I being farre absent from the Presse, I know not by what unhappy and disastrous meanes, there passed, beside ordi∣nary and literall Errata, many grosse and absurd mista∣kings and alterations of my translation, which was done precisely and faithfully according to the Authors Ori∣ginall. VVhereof to give you but a touch or taste: Page 23. line 11. the Latine is, quàm Cambrica, i. Britannicagens, is printed, Than the British Britain, without all sense, for, Than the Welch, that is, the British Nation. Page 38 line 15. Purple Tapestry remove, for, Purple Tapistry ridde, as it ought to bee. Page 200. line 14. of Saint Nicholas, for, Saint Michael, as it ought to be according to the Latin. Page 266. line 10. the Latine is, Aerem insalubrem, is crept in, Wholesome aire, for, Unwholesome aire, as it should bee. Besides, whole Verses and Lines left out, and eftsoones other VVords and Sentences foisted in: Substantives used for Adjectives, Adjectives for Substantives; Passive words used for Active, Actives for Passive; and so divers other passages, against the Law of Priscian, and Rules of Gram∣mar. Moreover, that Hiatus and want of number in some Verses, in other some Hypermeter, all by mee translated with full feet and musicall measure: and in some places, for Sense, , or down right nonsense, and such like stuffe in above a hundred places. All which now by my means, and command of the higher Powers, care of some of the Partner-Printers of this second Impression, and not with∣out the industry and helpe of my onely Son H. H. a mem∣ber of the Society of STACIONERS, are rectified, sup∣plied, and amended, to the better illustration of the work, contentment and solace of the future diligent Readers, and perusers of the said VVorke. Vale. 85. Aetat. suae, Anno Dom. 1636. Φ. THE SHIRES OF ENGLAND. BArke-shire, 279 Bedford-shire, 399 Buckingham-shire, 393 Cambridge-shire, 485 Ches-shire, 601 Cornewall, 183 Cumberland, 765 Darby-shire, 553 Devon-shire, 199 Dorset-shire, 110 Durham, 735 Essex, 439 Glocester-shire, 357 Hant-shire, 258 Hereford shire, 617 Hertford-shire, 405 Huntington shire, 497 Kent, 324 Lanca-shire, 745 Leicester-shire, 517 Lincoln-shire, 529 Middlesex, 419 Monmouth, 631 Northfolke▪ 467 Northampton-shire, 505 Nottingham-shire, 547 Northumberland, 799 Oxford-shire, 373 Richmond-shire, 727 Rutland-shire, 525 Shrop-shire, 589 Somerset-shire, 220 Stafford-shire, 581 Suffolk, 459 Sussex, 306 Surrey, 294 Warwick-shire, 561 Westmorland, 759 Wilt-shire, 241 Worcester-shire, 573 Yorke-shire, 689 THE SHIRES OF VVALES. ANglesey, 671 Brecknocke, 627 Cardigan-shire. 657 Carmarden-shire, 649 Carnarvon-shire, 667 Denbigh-shire, 675 Flint-shire, 679 Glamorgan-Shire, 641 Merioneth-Shire, 665 Montgomery, 661 Penbroke-Shire, 651 Radnor-Shire, 623 The first Index or Table, serving from the beginning of BRITAIN to the end of ENGLAND. A A, The first letter, thus sha∣ped, A 762 c Aaron a martyr, 73 f. 636 f Ab-adam a Baron, 364 d Aballaba, 761 a Abendon or Abington, 279 d Aber, 21 f Aber Avon, 645 f Aberbury castle, 592 f Aber Conwey, 669 e Aberford, 696 b Aberfraw, 672 f Abergevenny, 635 a Abergevenny castle defamed for treason, 635 b Abergevenny Lords, ibid. Abtots, a family, 579 b Abus, the same that Humber, 710 d Academia in Attica, 486 f Accabler, 21 f Ackmancester, 234 d Acmunderness, 752 e Actons, 364 a Acton Burnel, 591 f Adam de Portu, 269 a Ad Ansam, 448 c Adeliza Queene her praises, 309 a Aden what it signifieth, 117 c Aderborne a river, 245 d Adington, 510 b Ad Lapidem, 262 d Adminius, 418 c Admirals court, 180 b Ad murum, 819 c Adraste a goddesse among the Britains, 31 c Adrian the Emperor in Britain, 65 d Ad Rotum, &c. 449 c Adalph re-edifieth Peterburgh Abbey, 512 f Aeleonor K. Edward the First his wife, 397 a Aeleonor K. Henry the Third his widow liveth in a Nunnerie, 254 c Aeleonor Cobham, 304 a K. Aelfred, a Prince much trou∣bled, 224 b, c. First Mo∣narch of England, 158 c. Se∣cond founder of Oxford Uni∣versitie, 376 b Aelfritha K. Edgars wife, 254 c 262 b. a cruell and hatefull stepdame, 211 d Aelward Meaw, that is to say, white, 217 b Aeneus Sylvius, that is, Pope Pius Secundus, 818 e Aequity courts in England, 178 Aequivocation of Adam bishop of Hereford, 363 b Aesica, 781 d Aestii, 21 f Aeternalis Domus, what it is, 645 d Aethelbald the good King of the Mercians, 554 a. stabbed to death, 569 e Aethiopians why so named, 23 c 26 b Aethling, that is, the Prince, 614 a Aeton, 393 f Aeton or Eton Schoole, 288 f Agelocum, 545 f Jul. Agricola Lievtenant of the twentieth legion in Britaine, 53 e. Propretor in Britain, 54 b. discomfiteth the Ordo∣vices, 54 c, d. conquereth Anglesey, ibid. his civill and politicke government in Bri∣tain, 54 f. his martiall skill, 55. his other vertues and be∣haviour, 55, 56. hee vanqui∣sheth the Caledonians, 57. his patience, 57. his Oration to his soudiers, 59. his victorie, 61. his modestie, 62 Agrippina the Empresse her haughtie mind, 44 e, f Aidon castle, 808 f Ailesburies gentlemen, 395 f Ailesburie, 395 c Ailesford, 3 1 f Ailwin Healf Koning, 499 e Ainsbury or Ainulphsbury, 497 c Ainulph a religious man, ibid. Airmins a family, 5 3 a Akemanstreet-way, 377 b Alabaster-stone, 544 c Alabaster stone about Burton upon Trent, 586 b Alan a river, 194 c. 246 d Alan the son of Flaold, 589 f Alaricus King of the Goths, 86 b Alaun a river, 259 c. 813 c Alban a country, 126 c Albanes whence they tooke their name, 26 b S. Alban of Verlam our Stephen and Protomartyr of Britaine, 73 f. 409 f Albanie, 126 S. Albans a towne, 408 c S. Albans Church & town, 410 c 412 d S. Albans battels, 413 c Albenies Earles of Sussex, 320 e Albinus, 126 Albina, 24 b Albinus created Caesar, 68. hee usurpeth the Empire, 69. is slaine, ibid. Albion, 1, 23. whence it tooke name, 24 a Albrighton, 594 a Alchester, 377 b Alcwin a learned English Saxon, 137 f. 704 c Alborow, 701 c. 731 c. 466 a Aldelme Abbat, 244. a singular scholar and a devout man, ibid. Aldersgate in London, 423 d Aldgate in London, 423 e Aldingham, 755 d Ale the ancient English-mens drinke, 554 f Alen a riveret, 676 f. 681 f Alexander of Hales a great Clerke, 365 a Alexander the bountifull Bishop of Lincolne, 383 e. 539 d profuse in building, 549 d King Alexander the Great never in Britain, 32 d Alfreton, 555 e Algar Earle, 379 a Alheale, 14 d Alford in Lincolnshire, 542 b Alingtons a familie, 489 e Knights, 406 d Alipius, 79 Allabany, 126 Allectus his treachery 73. is van∣quished and slaine, ibid. Allobrogae, 19 Almans whence they tooke their name, 26 b. 124 Almondbury, 692 d Alne river, 566 a. 813 c Alnwick or Anwich, 813 c Alon a river, 801 e Alone, 794 c Alpes of Britain, 667 c Alpes why so called, 24 Alresford, 262 e All-souls Colledge in Oxford, 382 Alsten more, 799 c Alt a river, 748 c Althorp, 508 d Altars of the Gentiles and their Religion, 751 d, e Alterynnis, 617 c Altmouth a towne, 748 e Alvertonshire, 723 e Alum made, 217 a Alum earth discoverd by Sir Th. Chaloner, knight, 721 d Alured, See Aelfred. Alwena a devout woman, 494. d Ambacti, 16 Amboglana, 760 b Ambleside, ibid. Ambresbury, 254 b Ambro. what it is, 127 Abrones, ibid. Ambrosius Aurelius, 128 Ambrosius Aurelianus, 254 b Amersham, 394 e Amphibalus a martyr, 636 f Ampthil, 401 d Anas a river, 297 a. why so cal∣led, 245 c Ancaster, 537 b Ancaster heath, ibid. d Andate or Andates a goddesse a∣mong the Britains, 31. 457 e Andradswald, 306 c Audragathins a traitour drown∣eth himselfe, 83 Anderida the weald, 329 d Andernesse, 752 e Androgeus, Cynobelinus his sonne, the same that Mandru∣batius, why so called, 417 e Anesty in Hertfordshire, 405 f Angel a Province in Dania, 130 Angels, 610 c Ri. Angervil Philobiblos, 381 f Angles or Englishmen whence they came, 130 Anglesey, 671. why so called, 672 c conquered by king Edward the first▪ ibid. d. invaded by Sueto∣nius Paulinus, 49 Angotby, 545 a Angre, 440 b Ankam a river, 543 a Ankro the river, 569 c Anne wife to King Richard the Second, 297 d Anne Bullen mother to Queene Elizabeth, 256 f Anna a Christian King, 466 a Annius Viterbiensis, 24 Anselm against Priests mariage, 201 b Ansty or Ancienty liberty, 707 a Ant or Anton a river, 260 e Antivestaeum, 187 Anthony, 193 Antoninus Pius Britannicus, 66 Philosophus, ibid. Anubis Latrans, 17 Apelby, 761 a Apennini, 18 Apollinaris an herbe, 98 Appropriat Churches what they be, and how many, 161 Apthorp, 514 e Aquila his prophesie, 214 c Aquileia the city commended, 83 Aquitania why so called, 27 Ar, 21 Ara, ibid. Arar, 20 Araris a river in France, 694 a Arat, 20 Arbeia, 769 c Arches a court, 181 Archbishop of Canterbury, 136 Archbishops three in Britaine, 155. in England two, 160 Arconfield, 618 a Archdeacons, 222 c Archdeaconries in England how many, 161 Archigubernius, 66 Ardudwy, 665 e Areol, 594 e Are a river, 693 f. why so called, 694 a Arians what they were, 81 Arelate, 21 Aremorica, 19 Arfast Bishop of East England, 471 f Arden forest, 358 b Arden a forest in Warwickeshire, 565 c Arderns a family, 604 b Argentons, 406 d. 489 e Arians condemned, 77 Arianisme in Britaine, 78 Ariconium, 618 d Aristobulus mentioned by Saint Paul, in Britaine, 68 Arlech castle, 665 e Armanthwaite, 777 f Armaturae what they were, 783 Armes of Ailsburies, 395 d Armes of Will. de Albeny, 320 e Armes of the Alfretons Barons, 555 e. of the Bainards, 271. d of the Argentons, 406 d. of the Bardolps, 481 e. of the Blewets, 271 d. of the Bowes, 737 b. of the Bohuns, 311 f. of Brabant, 820 e. of Charle∣ton Lord of Powis, 663 c. of Colchester, 451 a. of Cusanz. 271 d. of Ela Countesse of Sa∣lisbury, 249 d. of the Ferrars, 526 a. of Sir Hen. Guildford, 352 b. of Harold, 617 d. of Hollands Knights, 749 d. of Th. Howard Duke of Norfolk, 483 c. Of the first Kings of England of Norman blood, 724. of the Lucies. 768 f. of Lumlies, 742 b. of the Mau∣leis, 719. of Montfichets, 453 of the Monthaults, 690 e. of the Mortimers de Attilbo∣rough, 473 b. of the Musards, 555 f. of the Muschamps, 815 c. of Saier Quincy and Roger his sonne, 267 Armes of the Percies, 768. of the Percies and Lucies, ibid. of Redvers Earles of Denshire, 207 e. of the Scales, 405 e. of the Segraves, 568 f. of the Sturmies, 254 f. of the Lord Stourton, 245 b. of Vaulx, 786 e. of Vermandors, 304 b. of Vescy, 723 a. 722 f. of Vi∣ponts, 763. of Warren Earle, 304 b Armie of God and Holy Church, 509 d Armorica what it signifieth, 111 Armorica, 19.12 Armorican Britons whence they came, 5 Arnulph of Montgomery con∣querour of Penbrochsh. 655 a Arrow a river, 565 d Arrow a towne, 566 a Arthur a British Prince, 128 Arthurs place of Nativitie and death, 194 Ap. Arthur a writer, 632 f Arthurs battell against Mor∣dred, 194 Arthurs sepulchre, 227 f Arthurs Epitaph, 230 a, b Arthurs table, 776 d King Arthurs Palace, 221 b Artisans or Craftsmen, 177 Arvandus his children killed, 262 d. 276 a Arveragus, 62 Arundell Earles, 309.310 Th. Arundel Baron of Wardour, 246 a. Count of the Empire, ib. Arundale, 308 d Arundels Knights, 193 Arwerton, 463 e S. Asaph a Bishops See, 679 d S. Asaph a goodly and upright man, ibid. e Ascohes Knights, 543 a Ascot, 396 a Ashbie Mares, 507 b Ashbie de la Zouch, 519 a Ashburnham, 317 e Ashburne in the Peake, 553 d Ashle manour, 481 f Ashdown, 442 f Ashridge, 395 a Ashford, 335 d Ashwell, 406 a Ashwell Thorp. 472 d Askerton castle, 782 f Askes a family, 729 f Asserius a learned Monk, 378 c Assises what they are, 445 Astbury, 608 f Astley castle, 569 b Astleies Barons, ibid. b Astleies a noble family, 581 d Astleis Knights, 217 a Astons a family, 584 e Th. Aston the first head-schoole∣master of Shrewsbury, 596 b Astroites a stone, 536 c Astwell, 505 e Athelney, 224 b Athelwold murdered by Edgar, 262 b Athyrston, 569 d Attrebatii, 278 Attacotti, 79.127 Attal-Sarisin, 185 Attilbridge, 473 d Attilburgh, ibid. b Attila the scourge of God, 197 a Atton a place and family, 722 b Avallon an Iland, 25 e Aubrey a family, 628 e Audience court, 181 Audre causey, 459 d Audre, 492 e S. Audre or Etheldreda, ibid. f S. Audries Liberties, 493 c Aventon, 258 d Aven a river in Hantshire, 258 e Avens a family, 485 d Averham or Aram a place, 549 Aufon river, See Nen. Augusta, See London. Augusta what they be, 424 d Augustus Caesar intended a voy∣age into Britaine, 39. he neg∣lecteth Britaine, ibid. Augustine Apostle of the English nation, 336 d. 136. where en∣terred, 337 f. S. Augustines crosse, 342 a. Augustines oke, 578 d. e Aulus Atticus slaine, 61 Aulus Plautius sent into Bri∣taine, 40. his exploits there, 41 Mercate Aultun, 269 a Awdleys or Aldeleghs, Barons, 583 Henry Awdley, 583 f. 584 a Iames Lords Awdley, 584 a Awdley end, 452 a Baron Awdley of Walden, 452 d Awkenbury, 501 c Awkland, 738 d Aulaf the Dane adopted, 261 f Aulbemarle Earles, 715 b Auldby, 709 e Aulcest r, 566 b Aulton castle, 587 c Avon a river in Somersetshire, 236 c Avon what it signifieth, 358 a Avon a river in Wiltshire, 242 a Avon river the lesse, 515 b. 517 Avon a river in Wales, 665 e Avon-well, 515 b Aure a yellow or golden colour, 26 Aurelius Conanus a tyrant, 113 Aurelius Ambrose, 259 a Aurenches or de Abrincis, 349 b Ausley castle, 588 e Aust-clive, 363 d S. Astins Church in Canterbu∣rie, 337 e Ax a river, 206 f Axan minster, ibid. f Axelholme an Isle, 544 b B BAblac, 373 c Babthorp, name of a place and family, 710 Babthorps father and sonne, ib. b Bacons a family, 463 e Sir Nicholas Bacon, L. Keeper, 461 f Iohn Baconthorpe the resolute Doctor, 479 b Bad, 21 Badbury hill, 216 e Baddeley, 607 e Bartholmew Lord Badilsmeere, 331 d Badesley, 566 d Baggington, 562 e Bagots, 586 e Bagmere Poole, 609 b Baines or Bathes much used, 732 Bainards castle in London, 424 b Bainards, 243 f Bailliol colledge in Oxford, 381 c Baine a river, 727 f Bainhams, 359 a Baintbrig, ibid. Baskewell a river, 557 b Bala a towne, 666 c Baldach, 473 f Baldock, 406 c Baldwine a Iustice, 395 e Baldwine le Pettour, 464 b Balshall a Commander of the Templars, 566 d Bamborow, 813 e Bampfeilds a family, 203 e Bampton, 207 b Ban a river in Lincolnshire, 541 Banbury, 376 a Banchor or Bangor Monasterie, 603 a Bannavenna, that is, Wedon, 508 Bannes Downe, 234 b Bandogs or Mastives, 434 e Banerets, what title of Gentrie, 171 a Baram Down, 345 a Barangi, 154 Barbacan in London, 433 d Bard, 4.14.15 Bard, 19 Bardolphs Lords, their tenures of certaine Lands, 302 d Bardus, 19 Bardney Abbey, 540 f Bardolphs Barons, 481 e. 548 f Bariden a river, 473 d Barkley Barons, 239 a William Vicount Barkley Earle of Notingham, 551 c Barklow, 452 a Bark-shire, 129 Barkway, 405 f Barnard castle, 736 e Saint Barnard Colledge in Ox∣ford founded, 382 b. re-edified, 383 b Barley a towne and famly, 405 f Barley the best, 485 b Barnwel Abbey, 487 f. Castle, 510 c Barnet, 425 e Barnet field, 415 d Barry an Island, 643 a Barries Vicounts in Ireland, 643 Baringtons a family, 453 d Barington Hall, ibid. Baro what it signifieth, 168 Barons what degree of honor, ib. Baronies many in Northumber∣land, 799 c Barons to the Count Palatine of Chester, 612 a. their office, ib. Barow, 521 b Barows or Burrows, 255 b Barton upon Humber, 542 f Baruch an holy man, 643 a Bascaads or Baskets, 491 e Basilicae, 743 f Basile, 473 f Basing, 269 b. the honour of the Barons S. Iohn Poinings and Powlets, Basing Stoke, 269 b Basing Werk, 680 b Baskervils worthy knights, 620 c Bassets a notable familie, 581 f Bassets of Welledon, 514 d Bassets of Brailesford, 553 d Baston, 21 Batable ground, 782 a Bateau, 21 Batersey, 303 a Batherton, 607 e Bath gate, 557 Bath Earles, 235 a Bath Knights, 172. their dub∣bing, ibid. Bath Citie, 233 b. the hot Wa∣ters thereof, ibid. Battell Bridge, alias Stanford Bridge, 709 e Battell Abbey founded, 317 b Battell of the Standard, 724 a Battell field, 596 c Battell at Nevils crosse, 741 b Battell at Solon Mosse, 782 a Battell a towne, 317 c Bauchadae, 19 Bawdes a family in Essex, 426 b Bawdsey haven, 465 d Beachy point, 313 d Beacons, 272 d Beavons of Southhampton, 250 e Beamfleot, 441 b Beare the badge of the Earles of Warwicke, 570 b Beanfield, 695 a Beauchamps, 399 d Henry Beauchamp Earle of War∣wicke his stile. 570 b. Duke, also of Warwicke, ibid. Iohn Beauchamp Baron of Ked∣dermister, 574 b Richard Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, 563 e. his tombe and epitaph, 564 a Beauchamps Barons, Lords Brooke, 223 f William Beauchamp the blind Baron, 574 b Beauchamps court, 565 f Beauchamp Baron of Pewich, 565 f Beauchiefe Abbey, 555 e Beaucliffe, 313 d Beaudley, 573 e Beaudesert, 585 a Sir Thomas Beaufoe of ancient descent, 564 e Iohn de Beaufort Earle of Sommersert, 230. refuseth the title of Marquesse Dorset, 217 d Beauforts Dukes of Sommerset, 414 e Beaulieu, 260 b Beaumanour parke, 521 d Beaumarish, 672 d Beaumeis, 594 a Iohn Beaumont the first Vicount in England, 521 Beaumonts of Cole Orton aunci∣ently and highly descended, 519 Beaumont a family in Yorkeshire, 693 a Rob. Beaumont of Pont Audo∣mar Earle of Mellent and of Leceister, 523 c his race or progenie, ibid. e Beavior or Belvior castle, 536 b Beauvoir or Belvoir vale, 535 d Bebba, 813 f Bebham, ibid. e Ant. Bec or Beck Bishop of Dur∣ham untrusty to his Ward, 328 a. 723. a Tho. Becket slaine by Courtiers, 337 b Becco, 20 Beda, 6. a learned Englishman, 137 Beda venerabilis, 744 a Bedw. 19 Beddington, 302 c Bedfordshire, 399 Bedford towne, ibid. e Bedford Lords, Earls and Dukes, 402 f Iohn Duke of Bedford his style and monument, 403 a Bedifoyd, 208 a Bedingfeild a place and family, 468 b De la Beech Knights, 282 e Beeston a castle and family, 607 b Saint Bees, 766 a Saint Bega a devout Irish woman ibid. Beichiad, 19 Belerium what cape, 1 Belgae in Gaule and Britaine, 219 b. whence so named, ibid. d King Beleus his Habergeon, 11 Robert de Belesmo rebelleth, 591 d. a cruell man, 599 b Bellisma aestuarium, a frith, 752 Bellister castle, 799 e Beln, Melin & Phelin, all one, 98 Belingsgate in London, 423 e Belinuntia, 98 Belinus a god, ibid. what it signi∣fieth, 391 e Belleland or Biland, 723 b Bellasise a family, 723 b Bellers a noble family sometime, 522 f Bellotucadrus, 691 d Benefician, what towne, 478 f Benedictine Monks, 226 d Benington, 407 f S. Benno, 680 c S. Bennaventa, is Wedon, 508 c, d S. Bennit in the Holme an Ab∣bey, 478 c Bengley, 815 b Ben-Gorion, 125 Bensted a family, 407 f Bensbury, for knebensbury, 302 f Benson, 388 d Bently, 463 e Bere park or Beau park nere to Durham, 741 Bericus a tratour to Britaine, 40 Berengarius le Moigne, that is, Monke, 510 c Berkhamsted, 414 c Bermingham or Bremicham, a towne and family, 567 b Bermondsey Abbey, 434 b Bernack 514 e Benrers a family, 405 d Berniciae, 817 a. 797 b Bernwood, 393 e. 395 Berohdon or Baradon, 525 f Berosus confuted, 10 Berry by Wicomb, 393 c Berstaple, 208 b Bertelin an Eremite, 584 d Berwick towne, 816 e Berwicks what they be, ibid. f Berwic in Elmet, 696 b Bery, 594 d Bery Pomerie, 202 a Betula or Betulla, 19 Betheney, See Stafford. Betony, 20 Beverley a towne, 711 d Iohn of Beverley, ibid. Bevers in Tivy river what crea∣tures they be, 657 e Beverston castle, 364 d Beufes of Lancashire, 745 e Bevils a family, 192.562 a Bezants or Bezantines what they be, 421 a Bibroci, 286 d Bie what it signifieth, 543 b Begleswade, 401 c Bigod, the name of Rollo the Norman, 144 Hugh Bigod, Lord chiefe Iu∣stice of England, 482 c Hugh Bigod Earle of Norfolke, 482 b Bigod, the name of hypocrites and superstitious persons, 144 Bigods a family, 465 d Bigots a family, 633 c Bigrames a family, 501 c Billesdun, 812 f Biland or Belleland, 723 b Th. Billing Lord chiefe Iustice of the Kings bench, 505 e Bindon, 212 b Binchester, 738 e Binchester penis, ibid. Binbrige Isle, 274 a Birdlip hill, 365 f. 366 c Pirinus the Apostle of the West-Saxons, 384 c Birling, 332 d Birthin a river, 636 c Birtport or Burtport, 210 e Biscaw wonne, 188 Bisham, 286 b Bishops of Durham, 735 Bishops of Bath and Wells, 232 c Bishops castle, 189 e Bishops Thorps, 707 c Bishops whether they might hold castles, 244 c Bishops gate in London, 423 d Bishops their place and preceden∣cy in England, 161 Bissemed, 401 b Bissets an honourable familie, 245.574 a Bittlesden, 396 d Bitumen, that is, Sea cole, 735 c Biwell castle, 808 c Bihan castle, 537 a Bithric Lords of Glocester, 368 Bizacium in Africke, 478 e Blackborne, 752 d Blackburne shire, ibid. e Blacklow hill, 564 d Blackelead, 767 b Blackemere a Baronie, 598 d Blackemore forest, 213 f Blackeamore, 717 b Blacketaile Poincts 213 Blackewater a Creeke, 443 e Rob. Blanchmains, 518 b Blackeney, 479 a Mercate Blandford, 215 e Blatum Bulgium, 775 c Blean Leveney castle, 628 d Blatherwicke, 514 b Blechindon, 377 a Blencarn a brooke, 763 c Blenkensop a place and family, 800 b Blestium, 617 c Blickling, 478 b Bletso, 399 d Blewets, 224 c Blisworth, 507 a Blith, 551 a Blith a river, 586 d. 466 e 812 a Bliphborough, 486 e Blithfield, 586 e Charles Blount or Blunt, Lord Montjoy Earle of Devonshire, 208 d Blounts or Blunts of Kinlets, 574 why so called, 591 b Blunts Barons Montjoy, 555 c Gilbert Blund, 461 d Boadicia or Bunduica wife to King Prasutaegus, 49 Boadicia, or Bunduica a noble and warlike Lady, 406 e. 51 is vanquished and poisoneth herselfe, 52 Bocking a fat Personage, 446 a Bocton Malherb, 331 b Bodine what he conceiveth of the name Britaine, 5 Sir Th. Bodley a singular bene∣factor to Oxford Librarie, 382 c Bodman, 191. Boduarie, 679 c Boeth what it signifieth, 732 c Bohuns Earles of Hereford, &c. 621 e Humfrey de Behun Earle of Es∣sex, 454 Hugh de Bolebec, 396 a Bolebec Baronie, 809 e Bolebec Castle, 396 a Bolerium, 187 Bollin a river, 610 b Bollingbrooke, 541 f Bolsover Castle, 556 c Bonosus a notorius bibber hang∣eth himselfe, 71 Boniface, See Winifride. Bonvill Lord, 206 c. 231 b. his calamities, ibid. c Bolton castle, 729 a Borrodale, 767 a Bone-well, 619 f Bonhommes a religious order, 395 a Bonhommes Colledge, 244 Bonium, 602 e Booth a family, 610 c Borsarse alias Brentwood, 442 Borwick, 809 d Borrovicus, ibid. Boscastle, 195 Boseham, 306 f Bostoke a place and family, 609 d Boston, 532 c burnt and ransacked, 532 d Bothal castle, 812 d Bosworth towne, 518 d Bosworth field, ibid. d Botereux castle, 195 Botereux a family, 566 b Botherwic, 544 d Botontines, 515 d Bottlebrig or botolph Bridg, 502 Bought on, 510 a Bovium, 643 c Bourchiers Earls of bath, 598 c 207 c Bourchier Baron of Berners, 405 d Bourchiers de Berners Lords, 472 d Bourchiers an honorable family 450 d Bowes or Bough a worshipfull fa∣mily, 731 c. 737 a. why so cal∣led, 732 e Bowland forest, 750 b Bowtetorts a family, 465 b Boxley, 332 c Brachae, 19 Bradenham, 393. e Brance, 19 Briti, ibid. Bridburn a place and family, 553 Bradford, 244 f Bradewardin a place, 6 8 c Bradwardin the profound Doctor, 618 c Bradstons Ancestors of Vicount Montacute and Barons Went∣worth, 364 a Braibrooke castle, 1513 e Braibrookes Barons, ibid. e Brackley, 505 d Braibrook, 329 c Brakenbake, 724 e Brackenburies a family of good note, 737 c Brambles, 274 c Brampton, 783 a Bramton, 815 b Bramton Brian castle, 619 c Bramish a river, 815 b Bancaster, 408 a Brian de Brampton, 619 c Brand, 568 e Brandons a family Suffolke, 465 e Branspeth castle, 739 Branonium, 575 a Charles Brandon Duke of Suf∣folke, 470 c Brannodunum, 480 a Bransford or Bensford-bridge, 517 e Brasen weapons, 188 Brasen nose Colledge in Oxford, 383 a Brasmatias, a kinde of Earth∣quake, 620 c Bray, 286 d. Lord Bray, 297 b. The breach by Greenwich, 328 a Nicolas Breakspeare, That is, Pope Adrian the forth, 414 f Breakspeare a place and family, 419 b Brechanius his 24. daughters all Saints, 627 a Breden forest, 224 a Breedon hils, 577 e Breedon a village, ibid. Breertons a family, 608 f. their death foreshewed, 609 b Breerton a place, 609 Brechnockshire, 627 Brechnock towne, 628 a Brechnock meere, ibid. Brechnock Lords, ibid. Brechnock made a shire, 677 e Bremenium, 803 Brember castle, 313 c Bremetonacum, 753 c Bremicham or Bermingham a town and familie, 567 Bren what it signifieth, 677 Bremin, what it is, 33 Brennus, 677 Brennus a renowmed King, 33 Bretenham, 463 b Breton a river, ibid. Brent a river, 421 Brent, See Falkes de Brent. Brentmarsh, 230 e Brentford, 421 Brentwood, 442 a Brentwell or Brounswell, 421 Broses Barons, 113 c. 201 f Breoses a family, 553 d Will. de Breos, or Braus, a strong Rebell, 629 b Breoses Lords of Brechnock▪ 623 Bretons a family, 556 b Bretts, 128 f Breusais, 138 f Brian, who so called, 117 Bridlington, 714 d Iohn of Bridlington, ibid. Brewood, 583 a Bricols, 400 e Bridge Casterton, 534 b Bridgford by Nottingham, 548 Brig for Glansford, 543 a Brigantes in Britaine rebelled, 43 Brigantes, 685. whereof they took name, ibid. Brill for Burihill, 395 b Breint Fitz Conty, 282 a Brients, 202 c, d Brients Barons, 215 d Brinlo, 568 f Brienston, 215 e Brimsfeild, 365 f Bridgewater, 225 a Earle of Bridgewater, 225 c Bridkirk, 768 b Briewer Baron, 222 e Bristoll or Bristow, a Citie, 237 a the reason of the name, ibid. b Bret the Primitive of the Bri∣tains, 26 Brit or Brith the first name of the Britains, 25 Brith what it signifieth, 26 Britaine or Britannie whence it tooke name, 27. why late dis∣covered and knowne, 33. men∣tioned by Lucretius, first of any Latin writer, ib. twice Schoole-Mistres to France, 138 Britaine the great, that is, Eng∣land, 155 Britaine the lesse, that is, Scot∣land, ibid. Britaine how divided, 154.155 Britaine what names it hath, 1. the site thereof, 1. the forme of it, ibid. why called a∣nother world, 24. the division and compasse of it, 2.4 Britaine hath sundry names, 23 the position thereof in respect of the Heavens, 4. how fruitfull and commodious, 3. her first in∣habitants, 4. the name, 5 Britaine under what signe or Pla∣net, 182 Britain portracted in womans ha∣bite, 24. the Roman world, 45 discovered to be an Iland, 61 a province Presidial, 62. How it was governed under and af∣ter Constantine the Great, 62 76. how it became subject to the Romans, 62. infected by Barbarians, 79. brought to ci∣vilitie, 63. called Romania, and Romaine Ile, 88 Britains ruin and downfall, 107 Britaine and France whether ever conjoyned, 346 a Britains came first out of Gaule, 11.12 Britans, in Religion, language and maners agree with the Gauls, 13.14.15.16.17 Britans emploied by Caesar in base services, 38 Britans generally rebell, 49. their grievances, ibid. Britains cast off the Romans yoke, 86 Britains how they may derive their descent from the Tro∣ians, 88 Britans in Armorica, 110 Britans of Wales and Cornewale, 112.113 Britans send Embassadours to the Saxons, 128 Britans retaine their ancient language, 23 Britans long lived, 555 b Britans painted themselves blue with wood, 20 Britans maners and customes out of Iulius Caesar, 29. out of Strabo, ibid. out of Diodorus Siculus, 29. out of Pomponius Mela, ibid. out of Cernelius Tacitus, 30. out of Dio Nica∣us, ibid. out of Herodian, ibid. out of Pliny, 3 . out of Solinus, ibid. Britaine Burse, 428 d Britannica the herbe. See Scorby or Scurvigrasse, Britanniciani what they were, 111 Briten huis, 40 Brithin a kind of drinke, 5 British tongue full of Greeke, words, 28 British States submit to Caesar, 37 British Iles mentiond by Polibi∣us, 33 Of British Perle a brestplate, 38 British names import colours, 26 British townes what they were, 29 Britwales or Welshmen, 113 Briva what it signifieth, 414 Brockets knights, 406 f Brocovum, 762 d Broge, 19 Brokes by a place, 522 f. a family, 523 a Brome, 467 f Bromesgrave, 574 Bromefield, 677 a Wolter Bronscorn Bishop of Ex∣cester, 190 Brookes a family of ancient de∣scent, 611 a Brooke, L. Cobham, 329 c Barons Brooke, 244 c Bronholme, 478 e Brougham, 762 d Brotherton, 695 b Sir Anthonie Browne first Vi∣count Montacute, 482 b Sir Ant. Browne Marquesse Montacute, 222 d Broughton, 376 e Broughton in Hantshire, 262 c Brundenels a family, 514 b Bruges Baron Chandos, 365 b Bruin a family, 442 b Burg-morfe or Bridg-North, 591 b Robert Brus the noble, 500 e Baron Brus of Skelton, 720 c Bruses a noble family, 526 b Brutus 5. why so called, 8 Bucken, that is, Beech trees, 393 George Buck, 22 d Buchonia and Buckenham, 393 a Buckinghamshire, 393 Buers a family, 463 b Walter Buc and his race, 812 b Buckingham town, 396 c. Earles, 397 d Buckhurst Baron, 320 Buelth, 627 e Bugden, 497 d Bulchobaudes, 79 Buldewas or Bildas, 593 e Bulkley a towne and family, 607 Anne Bullen or Bollen Marchia∣nesse of Penbroch, 655 e Bullen or Bollen Earle of Wilt∣shire, 256 e Bullen or Bollogne in France, the same that Gessoriacum and Bonoia, 348 d Th. Bullen Earle of Wiltshire di∣ed for sorrow, 257 Bulleum Silurum, 627 e Bulley or Busley a noble Norman, 551 a Bulverith, 316 e Buly castle, 76 c Bulnesse, 775 c Bumsted Helion, 452 a Bungey, 468 b Burdos or Burdelois, 473 a Burford in Shropshire, 590 f Burnt Elly, 463 d Burgesses, 177 Burgh under Stanemore, 760 Burgh castle, 468 e Burgh Clere, 72 c Burgi what they were, 760 f Burly a faire place, 526 b Burons an ancient family, Burrium, 636 c S. Buriens in Cornwal, 188. why so called, ibid. Burnel Baron, 330 c Burcester, 337 b Burdet, 566 c Bunbury for Boniface burry, 607 Burghersh alias Burgwash, 320 Bartholomew Burgwash a Baron 320 b Burghley, 514 Burgh, 727 f Burghsted, 442 e Burgh or Burrow Barons, 543 f Burne a Barony, ibid. Burnels a family, 591 f Burrowes what they are, 515 e Burrow banke, 452 e Burrow hill, 522 a Burrow bridg, 701 a Burrow a town, 522 b Baron Burrow or Burgh, 303 f Burrough a towne and family, 522 Burrough of Southwarke, 303 d Burthred the last King of Mer∣cians, 554 a Burse of London or Roiall Ex∣change, 439 b Burgh upon Sands, 775 e Burgundians brought into Bri∣taine, 71 Burton Lazers, 522 a Burton upon Trent, 586 b Burwell castle, 490 Buriall of men with legs a crosse, 808 a Bury Abbey, 460 e Bustlers a family, 489 e Busleys or Busseies a family, 535 Busy Gap, 800 f Butlers of Wem, 592 c Butler of Woodhall, ibid. c Butler Earle of Wiltshire, 256 d Butlers a family, 748 b Butlers or Botelers of Ireland, 752 f Butterby, 739 Butsiet, 20 Buttington, 662 Burton well, 557 c Byliricay, 442 e C CAblu. 21 Cadbury, 221 c Cadier Arthur or Arthurs chair, an hill, 627 c Cadocus Earl of Cornwall, 197 b Cadugan ap Blethin, 658 c. 662 c a renowned Britaine. Caerulus & Caerulum, 24 Caesars entry into Britaine, 343 e where hee passed over the Tamis, 295 e Caesaromagus, 442 b Caesarea the name of manie Ci∣ties, 442 b Iul. Caesar his temperance and small port, 38 his patience, ibid. conquered not Britaine, 38 he neglected Britaine, ibid. Caesares, 164 Caer what it signifieth, 204 a Caer Caradocke an Hill, 590 a Caer Custeineth, 668 d Caerdiff, 642 d Caerfuse, 661 e Caer Gai, 666 a Caer Guby, 673 a Caer Guortigern, ibid. Caerhean, ibid. Caer Leon, ibid. Caermardenshire, 649 Caermarden City, 649 e Caernarvonshire, 667 Caernarvon-towne, 668 e Caer Pallad r, 270 a Caer Phillicastle, 642 a Caer Segonte, 270 a Caer Vorran, 800 e Caer went, 633 d Caer wisk, 679 d Caihaignes a family, 395 Caius Caesar ment to invade Bri∣taine, 40. his vanity, his voi∣age thither, 41. his triumph over Britaine, 42 Cainsham, 236 e Calaterium nemus, 723 d Caishoberry, 415 a Calc. i. lime, Calcaria, 699 a Calder the river, 691 a Caldwell, 731 c Caledonians make head against the Romans, 56 Caloughdon, 568 c Calphurnius Agricola, 66 Calshot or Caldshore, 260 d Calveley a place and worthy fa∣mily, 608 d Sir Hugh Calveley a valiant knight, 608 d Callais no ancient towne, 348 b Calthrops a family, 463 e Cam a river, why so called, 486 a Cam, 21 Camalet, 221 b Camalet townes, ibid. c Camalodunum, 43. lost, 50 Cambodunum 449. Camb-alan-river, 194 Camboritum, 486 a Camden or Camp den, 364 f Camden the Author his opinion of the name of Britannia, and the originall of Britans, 9 Cambridge in Glocestershire, 362 c Cambridgeshire, 485 Cambridge defaced and burnt, 488 b Cambridge town and Universitie, 486 c When it became an Universitie, 489 a Camulus a God, 446 e Camell a river, 194 Camelsford, ibid. Candishor Cavendish, 554 b Camois Barons, 312 e Candocus see Cadocus. Cambridge Earles, 495 e Camvills a family, 569 a Camur, 21. Candetum, 20 Cangi a people in Britaine, 611 b 231 a. subdued, 43 Cank-wood, 583 e Canterium, 19. Cantroed, 20 Cantelowes an honorable family, 514 a Cantlow, 201 f Th. Cantlow a Bishop and Saint, 619 c Cantium what cape, 1 Canterbury Colledge in Oxford, 381 a Canterbury, 336 c. Canterbury Archbishops Primates of Bri∣taine, 338 e Cantred what it is, 650 b Cantred Bitham, ibid. Cantred Maur, 650 c Can a river, 759 c. 445 d Cancefeilds a family, 755 d Candale or Kendale a Barony, 759 c Canel Cole, 735 d Canonium is Chelmesford, 445 d Cantabri and Scithians of like manners, 121 Canvey Isle, 441 a Cantaber a Spaniard founder of Cambridge Universitie, 487 a Canutus his Apophth. 261 e Canvills a family, 515 c Capgrave his legends, 646 Capitatio a Tribute, 100 Caradauc Urichfas, 590 c King Caradock, 633 , f. deli∣vered unto Ostorius, 590 a. taken prisoner by Queen Cac∣tismana, 44. his undaunted courage, ibid. Caratacus Prince of the Dimeiae 657 e. 43 Caranton, 220 Cardiganshire, 657. Lord there∣of, 658 c Cardigan a towne, 657 e Careg castle, 650 Carleton a towne and family, 472 d Carews of Surry, 302 c Carews a family, 652 c Carew castle, ibid. Carew of Anthony, 198 d Carewes a noble family, 202 e 282 d Caries, 202 e R. Carew, 193 Carew Baron of Clopton, 565 b Careston, 517 c Carlile, 778 d. Old Carlile, 773 b. Carlile had one Earle, 780 d Carnabies a family, 808 f Carthismandua wife to Venusius a stout Lady, 48. her loose life and adultery, 53 Carmelite Friers, 351 e. brought first into England, 813 d Carthmell, 755 a Caribec, 121 Carisbrook, 275 c Careswell a castle and family, 587 Carausius usurpeth the Empire 72. governeth Britaine well, ib. slaine by Allectus, 72 Carus and Carinus Emperours, 73 Carminow, 190 Carrs a family, 815 Carr a river, 210 c Carmouth, 210 b Carram, 815 a Carvills a family, 481 a Carvilius, 37 Henry Cary Baron of Hunsden, his high and noble descent, 408 409 Sir Edmund Cary knight of high descent, 414 e Cassibelinus Generall of the Bri∣taines armie, 36 Cassibellinus or Cassiavelanus encountereth Caesar and the Romans, 37. is repulsed, ibid. treateth about peace with Cae∣sar, 37 Cassii, 391 c. why so called, ibid. f Caster, 473 d Caster in Huntingdonshire, 502 a Castigand an high hill, 501 d Castle in the Peake, ib. 502 a Castle Acre, 481 c. 557 d Castle Ashby, 509 e Castle Camps, 488 f. 489 f Castle Cary, 696 b Castle Coch, 662 b Castle Colwen or of Maud in Colewent, 623 b Castle Crest by Lichfeild, 582 e Castle Comb, 243 e Castle Dinas Bran, 677 c Castle Dinas, 628 d Castleford, 695 a Castle Gard, 345 a. 201 c Castle Paine, 623 b Castle steeds, 783 b. 793 d. 808 Castor, 542 d Catadunae or waterfalls, 759 f Castellan Denis, 194 Catesby a towne, 508 b. ananci∣ent family, ib. tainted by Rob. Catesby of Ashbie Saint Leger, ibid. 431 d Catheri Heretickes, 84 Catlidge, 498 b Catmose a vale, 525 f Caterna, 18 Caterva, ibid. Cattieuch lani, 391 Catarick, 730 c, d Caturactonium, 730 c Caturfa, 18 Caud a river, 778 b Caudbeck, ibid. c Sir Will. Cavendish or Candish Baron of Hardwick, 556 a Caves, a family, 515 b A Cave wonderfull in Glamor∣ganshire, 643 b Caurse castle, 592 e Causeies or highwaies in Britain, 63. what names they have in divers authors, 64. by whom and how they were made, 64. in Italy and else where, 64 Cawood, 707 d Caxton, 485 c Cecily Nevill, mother to King Edward the fourth, 511 b. an unfortunate Lady, ibid. b, c. her tomb subverted, 510 e Rob. Cecil Baron of Essendon, Viscount Cranburn, 217 c Rob. Cecil Earle of Salisbury, 250 e Thomas Cecil Earle of Excester 206 a Sir Wil. Cecil baron Burghley, 514 e Cedos, Caesar, 18 Centuries, see Hundreds. Celtae, whence derived, 20 Cerdick a warlike Saxon, 477 d Cerdick sand, ibid. Cerdick shore, ibid. Cerastis, 184 Cerealis vanquished 50. hee con∣quered the Brigantes, 54 Cerne Abbey, 212 b Cerygy Drudion, 675 c Cester an addition to cities, 517 Cester Over, ibid. Cley-Cester, 518 b Chad a famous Bishop of Lich∣field, 585 e. 441 a canonized a Saint, ibid. Sir Thomas Chaloner a learned knight, 721 d Chambre in the forest, 607. a Chamberlaines sometime Tan∣kervils, 389. d Chamberlainship of England, 489. f Rob. Chamberlain an Archrob∣ber, 531. e Champernouns or Campernulhs, 201. c Iohn Chandos made Baneret, 171.365. b Chandos Baron, 365. b Chariot fight of the Britans, 36 Charing crosse, 432. c Charles the eight king of France his Apophthegm. 403. a Charleton in Worcestershire, 578. b Charleton Castle, 594. a Charletons Lords of Powis, ib. Charlecot a place, 564 f. a family, 565. a Charnewood or Charley forest, 521. d Charta de Foresta, 293. Charter house in London, 433. d Chartley castle, 584. f Chure, a fish, 755. d Chateries or Cheatrish, 494. d Chatmosse, 747. a Chuttesworth, 554. b Chaucer, our English Homer born at woodstock. 375. f Chaucombs, a family, 568. e Chaumonds, 196. b Chauncerie, 80 Chauncellour, 180 Chaworths, a family, 395 e. 555. descended from Cahors in Quercy, 549. c Cheapen what it signifieth, 243. d Cheardsley, 395. f Chea ford hundred, 442▪ c Cherk i, 587. d Cheadse, 587. d Chellington, 581. e Chelmer river, 444. d Chelmerford or Chenceford, 445 Chelsey, 421. c Chen y Baron of Hersford, 466 Chencies or Chienies an house, 394. a Sir Henry Cheiney Baron, 401 Chepstow, 633. b. Lords thereof ibid. c Cherry trees brought into Bri∣taine, 324. b Chertford, 258. e Chertsey, 294. the monastery thereof founded, 294. d Cherwel the river, 373. b. his head. 507. e Chesil a banke or sandrige, 210. e Che ses of the best, 601 Cheshire, ibid. Countie Palatine, 601. b Chesham bois, 394. f Chesterfield 452. e. in Scardale, 556 Chester Earles, 611. f Chester Earle Count Palatine, 612. a. what Barons hee had under him, ibid. Chester Earldome made a prin∣cipality, 612. f Chester, or West-Chester city, 604. c Chester, and Cheshiremen des∣cribed, 602. a Chesters what they are, 793. d Chester in the wall, 800. f Chester upon the street, 742. c Little Chester, 554. c Chesterton under Lime, 583. c Chetwoods a family, 399. d Chevalry court, 190 Chevin, 698. d Cheviot hills, 812. e Chic, or Chick, the old name of Saint Osiths, 451. c Chidleys, 203. a Chicheley, Archbishop of Can∣terbury, 510. b Chichester, 307. c. Earles of Chi∣chester, ibid. f Chicksand, 401. c Chillingham, 815. c Chilterne 389, c. 393. c. why so called, id. Chippenham, 243. d Chirke, 677. c Christs Church in Hantshire, 259. c Christianity flourisheth in Bri∣taine, 75, 67, 68. Christs Church in Oxford, 383. a Chrisanthus Bishop of the No∣vatians, 84 Churne the river, 366. a Churnet a river, 587. c Cholmondley a towne and family, 607. d Chopwel a riveret, 735. b Christ Church in Canterbury, 337. b Cirncester, 366. b Cinque ports, 318. a▪ which they be, 325 Cilurnum, 806. b Cimbrica Chersonesus, 129 Citizens, 177 Cissbury, 312. d Cistertion Monkes. 295. a Civilis a deputy in Britaine. 80 Civitas or Citie what it signifieth in Caesar, 417. d Cities by what ceremonies built by Romans, 102 Iohn Clapham a brave warriour 697. b Clare a noble village, 462. a noble family of Earles, ibid. b Clarence, 462. b. Dukes thereof, ibid. Claridon, 240, e Clares Earles of Glocester, 330 Richard de Clare his commenda∣tion. 416. a Earles of Clare whence so stiled, 415. e Claudia Rufina, a British Ladie, 62, 68 Claudius Caesar honoured as a God in Britaine, 448. b Clausentum, 261. a Claudius Caesar first that van∣quished the Britains, 45. hee brought the South part of Bri∣taine to be a Province, 101 Claudius Contentus, 341. e Clavering, 453. b Clavering the name of Fitz Ri∣chard, 81. a Claxton, 738. a Claxtons a family, ibid. Clay-Hill, 245. d Clemens Maximus an Usurper, 341. c Clee Hill, 591. d Cleres a family, 478. b Cley brooke, 518. b Cliftons a family in Notingham, 547 Sir Gervase Clifton, Baron Clif∣ton, 502. d Cl ff a towne, 329. d Clifford castle, 618. a Cliffords Earles of Cumberland, 618. b Cliftons a family, Earles of Lin∣colne, 545 Clipsby a town and family, 478. d Clithero castle, 750. a Clives ad Hoo, 329. d Cliveland, 720. b Clopton a towne & family, 565 Clodius Albinus propretor in Britaine, 67 Cloudesbury, 749. e Cluid a river in Wales, 676. c Cluid a river, ibid. d Clun castle, 589. e Clun or Colun, a river, ibid. e Clyto, that is, the Prince, 164. an addition given to all the Kings Sonnes, ibid. Cnobersburg, 468. e Cnouts or Canuts delf, 501. b Cobham towne, 329. c Cobham Barons, ibid. b Lords Cobham of Sterborrow, 303. e Coc, a river, 696. b Coch or Coccus, 19 Coch what colour, 26 Coccium, 745. f Cockar a river, 767. f Cockington, 202. e Cockley Chappell, 745. f Cocks eies a worshipfull family, 574. a Codanus Sinus, that is, the Oost Sea, 141 Codenor castle, 555. d Canobies what they are, 603. c Cogans, 207. c Cogeshal a towne, 446. a Cogeshal a family, 446. b Coine antique of Aemilianus & Marius &c. 643. e Coined pieces of embased silver, 65. a, d Coines British and Roman in Britain, 88. &c. Coinage of Tinn, 186 Coigniers a noble family, 737. d Coigniers Barons, ibid. Coitie, 643. e Cokains a family, 553. d Coker a river, 753. c Cokarsand Abbey, ibid. Cokermouth, 767. f Sir Edward Cooke Knight, 481. c his commendation, ibid. Cokerington, 542. c Cole a river, 394. a Col a river neere Saint Albans, 414. a Colbrook, 394. a Colepits on fire, 581. d Coles give evidence of ancient mere-markes, 515. d Coles-Hull or Hill, 681. d Coleshul, 567. c Cole Overton, or Cole Orton why so called, 519. c Colbrand the Giant, 267. a Colliweston, 514. d Colchester, 450. e Colecester, 808. c Colham, 419. c Colingwoods a warlike family, 813. c Collerford, 806. b Colne a river, 450. a Carles Coln, ibid. Wakes Coln, ibid. Whites Coln, ibid. Calne a towne, ibid. Coln Engain, ibid. Colepepers a family, 526. b Colonies, 703. a Colonie what it is, 448. a Colvils, 537. a Columbe a river, 203. a Columbton, ibid. Saint Columbs, 193 Comata, 20 Comati, ibid. Comb what it signifieth, 207. b 393. d Comb Marton, 20. a Comb, 21 Comb Abbey, 569 a Combat appointed between Hen∣rie of Lancaster and Thomas Mowbray duke of Norfolke, 428. f. Betweene Roger Bi∣shop of Salisbury, and William-Montacute Earle of Salisbu∣ry, 249. a. Betweene Edmond and Cnute, 360. b Comes Britanniorum, 76 Comes Littoris Saxonici, ibid. 325. a Comes Sacrarum Largitionum, 77 Comes privatarum, ibid. Comes a title of dignity, 166 Comites what they were at first 165. See more in Earles, Comitatus Caesaris, ibid. Cominus Atrebas or of Arras, 35.37 Commodus the Emperour, 66 Common Plees Court, 178 Compton in the Hole, 561 c Sir Henry Compton Baron, 561 Compton Murdack, 565. a Composition betweene King Ste∣phen and Henrie Duke of Anjou, 482. b Composition of names, 27 Concani a Nation in Cantabria, 121 Condate, 608. c Condorcum, 742. c Condover, 592. a Congar, 231. d Congersbury, 231. d Congleton, 608. n Conquests a family, 401. e Wil. Cannings his monuments, 237. f Coningsbees, 415. d. a family of good name and worth, 620. d Connisborow castle, 689. f Constable Burton, 714. b Constables a great family, ibid. High Constables of England, 621. c Constantius Chlorus riddeth Bri∣taine of Usurpers, 73. elected Emperor, 74. espoused Helena mother of Constantine the great, 74. putteth her away, ibid. weddeth Theodora, ib. a godly Emperour, ibid. died at Yorke, ibid. buried there, 703 Constantine the Great Emperor, 74. his warlike exploits, 75. ad∣vanceth Christian religion, 75 proclaimed Emperor in Yorke, 703. e. f. his renowned titles, 76. first entituled Dominus Noster, 76. taxed for subver∣ting the Roman Empire, ibid. altereth the state of the go∣vernment. ibid. Constantine the younger ruleth Britaine, 77. slaine by his bro∣ther Constans. ibid. Constans an Emperiall Monke, 264. c. 85. is killed, ibid. Constans Emperour in Britaine, 77. holdeth a councell at Sar∣dica, ibid, killed by Magnen∣tius, ibid. Constantius the yonger Emperor, ibid. favoureth Arianus, 78. holdeth a councell at Arimi∣num, 79 Constantine created Emperor in Britaine for the name sake, 270. d. 85. his exploits, ibid. his gourmandise, ibid. Constantine a tyrant among the Danmoni in Britaine, 113 Constitutions of Clarinton, 251 Conwey a river, 667. b. 669. d Conwaie a towne, 669 Convocation, 181 Converts their house, 428. b Sir Th. Cooke a rich Maior of London, 441. f Counts Palatine. See Earles, Th. Cooper Bishop of Lincolne, 540. c Copes, a family, 376. e Copper or Brasse mynes, 767. a Coper as made, 217. Copland or Coupland, 765. d Iohn Copland or Coupland, a brave warrior, 775. e. made Baneret, 171 Coquet the river, 812. e Copthall, 439. Corbets a great family, 592▪ e 594 e Corbet a forename, ibid. Sir Wil. Cordall Knight, 462. e Corinaea and Corinaeus, 184 Corinaeus and Gogmagog, 200 c Coritani, 504 Cornden hill, 662 b Cornelius Nepos, for Ioseph of Excestre, 32 Cornavii, 614, 560 Cornovaille in little Britaine, 184 Cornage, 787 a Cornwalleies a family, 467 f Cornwailes of Burford highly descended, 590 f Cornwall a dukedome, 198 c why so called, 184 Cornwallians soone subjected to the Saxons, 114 Corpus Christi Colledge in Ox∣ford, 383 a Court Barons, 168 Cornishmens manners, 186 Cornish Chough, 188 Corham in Coverdale, 729 Corbridge, 808 b Corby Castle, 777 f Corstopitum, ibid. Corve a river, 590 c Corvesdale, ibid. Coway stakes, 296 a Cowling Castle, 329 d Cosham, 243 c Coughton, 565 Covinus, 18 Costrells, See Esquires. Coy-fi a convert Bishop of the heathen, 711 c Coteswold why so called, 364 c Henry Courtney Marquesse of Excester, 206 a Courtneyes knights, 206 b. Earls of Denshire, 207, 208. Court∣neyes, 190 f Cottons knights, 313 Coverts knights, ibid. Cottons of Cambridge-shire knights, 491 a Cottons of Cunnington, 526 c Sir Robert Cotton of Cunnington a learned knight, highly de∣scended, 500 d Covetousnesse complained of. 562 Coventry. 567 c Coventry Lords, 568 a Councell of the Marches, 590 e Cow a Towne West and East, 274 c Cowbridge, 643 c Cradiden, 493 a Cranburn, 217 b Crecan or Crey a river, 328 f Creeke Lade, 241 e Credendon or Credon, 396 Creplegate in London, 413 d Cressy a family, 550 Crevequeurs, 331 c Crawdundale, 761 f Crew a place and notable family, 608 c Creden a river, 203 d Crediantun or kirton, ibid. Craven, 694 b Creake in Cliveland, 723 e Le Craux, 21 Croco or Croke a river, 609 b De Croeun or de Credonio a Ba∣rony, 532 f Crococalana, 537 b Croidon, 302 b Cromwells knights, 497 d Sir Th. Cromwell, 526 b. Earle of Essex, 454 e Cromer, 479 a Croft Castle, 619 Crofts knights, an ancient family 619 f Crophuls a family, 620 c Crouch a creek , 443 b Crowland, 530 b Crowland Abbey, 530. the foun∣dation and building of it, 531 c. d. e Cruc Maur, 537 c Cruc Occhidient, ibid. Cuckmere, 315 d Cucul, 19 Saint Cudman, 313 c Cuentford a br oke in Coventry, 567 d Culchil, 747 c Culfurth, 461 Cumberland, 765 Kings and Earls of Cumberland, 788 a Cumbermer Abbey, 607 e. 799 Cumero, 21 Cuneglasus a Tyrant in Britain, 113 Cuno what it signifieth, 98 Cunobelinus, 418 a Cunobelin, 447 b Curia Ottadinorum, 818 b Curiales what they were, 771 a Cursons a family, 553 c Sir Rob. Curson Baron Imperi∣all, ibid. Robert Curthose an unfortunate Prince, 361 d Curcies, 221 a Iohn Curcie his vertues, ibid. Curtius Montanus a dainty teo∣thed glutton, 342 e Saint Cuthberts parcimony, 735 Saint Cuthbert Bishop of Linde∣farn, ibid. Cworwf, 20 Curwens knights, 769 a Custodes or captaines in every shire, 159 Cuthred King of the West Sax∣ons, 373 f Cyprus called Keraftis, 184 Cyrch, 18 Cythariftes, 21 D DAbernoun, 297 b D'acre Barons of Gilles∣land, 594 c Dacre castle, 776 c D'acre Baron, ibid. Leonard D'acre a Traitour and Rebel. 784 f Dacor a river, 776 c D'airells or D' Hairells, 369 e Dalaley castle, 593 Dalison or D'alanson a family, 544 c Dalrendini, 126 Dan or Daven a river, 608 d Danby, 721 f Danbury, 446 b Dancastre, 690 b Danewort, See Walwort. Danes infest the coasts of Eng∣land, 139. why so called, 141 they land in England, &c. 142 Danes massacred by the English, 143 Their detestable sacrifice, 142 Danegelt atribute, ibid. Danmonii, 183. whence their name commeth, ibid. Daning-schow a riveret, 608 e Dantesey a town, 243 c Danteseys knights, ibid. Dantrey towne, 508 a. the fort there, ibid. Henry Baron Danvers of Dante∣sey, 243 c Darby shire, 553 Darby towne, 554 c Darby Lords and Earles, 558 d Darcies de Nocton, &c. 543 c Darcies Barons de Chich, 451 c Darent river, 328 d Darenford or Dartford. 328 Darwent a river and city, 709 Davenport or Damport a place and notable family, 609 a Saint Davids land, 653 c Saint Davids an Archbishops See, 653 d David bishop refuteth the Pela∣gians, 657 b Davery, or de alta rupe, 312 b Dawnes of Utkinton, foresters of Delamere, 607 a Deben a river, 465 b Depenham or Dapenham, ibid. Dee a river, 594 c. whence so called, 602 c. Dee-mouth, 604 b Dee head, 666 b Devonshire or Denshire, 199 a Walter, and Robert Devreux Earles of Essex, 455 a Iohn Dee a famous Mathemati∣cian, 746 c Decimes, See Tithings. Decuman a Saint, 220 e. murde∣red, ibid. Decuriones what they were, 771 Saint Decombs, 220 e Deale or Dole, 343 a Deanries how many in England, 161 Deanforest, 358 b Deane a place, 514 a Deanes a family, ibid. Deifying of Roman Emperours, 70 Deiri, that is, Hol-der-Nesse, 136 De la-mares, 233 a De la mere forest, 607 a De-la-pree, a Nunnery, 509 b D' eincourts Barons of Blanke∣nay, 535 f Edmund Baron D'eincourt desi∣rous to perpetuate his name, 536 a De la cres Abbay, 787, c Iohn De la Pole Earle of Lin∣colne slaine, 549 a. 388 f De la bere, an ancient family, 620 c D'elveseyes, a family, 607 e Delgovitia, 711 b Delgwe what it signifieth, 711 b De la val Baronie, 811 f De la ware, 364 c Dench-worth townes, 281 a Denelage, 153.159 Dengy, or Dauncing hundred, 443 c Dengy towne, ibid. Dengy Nesse, 352 a Dennington castle, 284 a Edward Deny Baron of Wal∣tham, 439 b Denisses, 206 c Denbigh-shire, 675 Denbigh towne, 675 d Denbigh Baron, 676 b Denbigh made a shire, 677 e Depford, 326 c Depenbach, 603 c Deping, 534 c Derlington, 737 d Derwen a river, 752 d Derwent a river, 553 b Derwent fells, 767 a Deorhirst, 360 a Deorham or Derham, 364 Dercoma, 20 Derechel, 21 Dereham, 482 a Derchefu, 21 Dert a river, 201 d Dertinton, 201 Dertmore, 201 d Dertmouth, 202 c Despencer a noble family, 322 b Hugh le Despencer, 267 c Despensers Barons, 636 a Devi a river, 258 Devy Bishop of Saint Davids, 226 Deverril, why so called, 245 Dewsborrough, 693 a Devonshire Earles, 207 c Despotae, 164 Dianaes chamber, 426 a Digbies an ancient race, 525 e Sir Everard Digby, 525 f Alane de Dinant Baron of Bur∣ton, 510 a Dimetae, 647 Dimocks a worshipfull familie, 535 f. 541 c Dimocks the Kings champions, 541 c Dilston a town, 808 b Dinevor Castle, 649 Dinleys or Dingleys a familie, 578 b Dishmarch, 690 e Ditches or fore-senses in Cam∣bridge shire, 490 a Dinhams a family, 395 f. 207 b or Dinants, Aul. Didius Lievtenant in Bri∣tain, 48 Dicalidones, or Deucalidones rather, why so called, 117 Dignities ecclesiasticall how ma∣ny in England, 161 Diamonds in Cornwall, 186 Diamonds or Diamants neere Bristoll, 239 a. b Dictum, 669 f Diganwy, ibid. Diocesses under every severall Bishop, 160, 161 Disce or Dis a towne, 472 e Distent ns Gentlemen, 766 f Disart Castle, 680 b Dive a family, 399 De Divisis a Monastery, 513 e Division of Countries threefold, 154 Divils or Devilsburne a river, 808 b Divils or Devils dike, 459, 490 c Divils or Devils, 609 c Divils or Devils bolts, 701 b Divona, 17 Divitiacus a mighty Prince, 34 Dobuni, 354. whence so named, ibid. Dodo or Dudo an English Saxon, 581, 359 c Dod of S. Quintins a writer, 142 Dodington, 607 e Dogs of Britaine, 263 d. 126. of Scotland, S. Dogmael, or S. Tehwell, 654 d D'oilyes of Hoch Horton Barons, 375 b Dologethle, 665 e Dolphins, 164 Doomesday booke, 153 Domitian tormented with envie, 61 Don or Dune a river, 689 d S Donats Castle, 643 e Dor a river, 176 d Dormceaster, 501 e Dormers knights, 395 f. 396 a Dornford, 501 e K. Dorne his pence, 212 b Dorchester, 384 b. 212 c Dorsetshire, 209 Dorset Marquesses and Earles, 217 c Dotterell, a bird, 443 c Dove or dow a river, 587 b Dover, 344 b Dover Castle, ibid. Dovy a river, 665 Dowbridge upon Watlingstreet, 408 d Dowgate or dourgate in London, 423 e Downes, 313 d Downham, 494 c Draicot a towne in Staffordshire, and a family, 587 e Dragons in Banners, 195 Sir Francis Drake, 200▪ e. where born, ibid. his navigation, ibid. Draiton, 419 c Draiton in Shropshire, 594 b Draiton Beauchamp, 394 f Draiton Basset, 581 f Draiton in Northamptonshire, 510 b Drax a village, 707 e Driby a towne and family, 542 c Driffield, 711 d Droit-wich or Durtwich, 574 e Dropping well, 700 a Druidae, 4, 12, 13, 14, the Etymo∣logie of their name, 14 Druidae in Britain did service in war, 49. they held one God, 68 Druidae seated in Anglesey, 671 d Drumbough castle, 775 c Druries a family, 461 e Drystocke, 325 e Duddensand, 754 f Dudden a river, 581 c Ambrose Dudley Earle of War∣wicke, 571 a Iohn Dudley Earle of Warwicke beheaded, ibid. Dudleys, 280 e Iohn Dudley duke of Northum∣berland his stile and demeanor, 821 e, f Rob. Dudley Earle of Leicester, 524 b Dulcitius a redoubted captaine, 80 Dulverton, 220 c Duina first Bishop of Lichfield, 585 d Duglesse a riveret, 749 c Dun a notorious theefe, 402 d Dunbriton frith, 56 Dunham, 610 c Dunmaw, 444 e Dunnington, 521 f. 567 c Dunstable, 402 a. the crosse there ibid. Dunster castle, 220 d Dunstan Abbot, 227 d Dunstan putteth downe married Priests, 576 b. 243 d Dunstaburg, 813 e Dunsley, 718 d Dunseavill, 243 Dunum, 21, 247 Dunwich, 466 c. a Bishops See, ibid. Dunus Sinus, 718 d Iohn Duns alias Scotus, 814 b Durobrivae, 501 e Dur and Dour, beginnings and terminations of places what they signifie, 209 d Durham citie, 739 e Durham Colledge in Oxford founded, 381 f. reedified, 383 Durham Bishopricke a County Palatine, 736 a Dursley, 364 c Durance an house of the Wroths, 437 e Durocobrivae, 413 e Durnovaria, what it signifieth, 212 Durosiponte, 491 d Durotriges whence derived, 209 Dû, what colour, 26 Dutton a place and worthy fa∣mily, 602 f Dwr, 20 Dux Britanniae, 76 Dux or Duke what title of honor, 164. under a Count or Comes, ib. Dux and Comes the same, ibid. Dux or Duke a title of charge, ib. a title of honour, 165 Dukes investure or creation, ibid. Dukes hereditary, ibid. E EAdburga a Lady professed re∣ligions, 395 c Eadburton a towne, ibid. Eadelmton or Edmunton, 437 d King Eadgar stiled Monarch of whole Albion, his triumph, 605 b K. Eadgar the peaceable, 130 a Eadred stiled King of Great Bri∣tain, 139 a Ealburg, 701 e Ealdermen, 164 Ealphage a learned Priest mar∣ried, 201 b Ealpheg Archbishop of Canter∣bury executed, 326 d Earle what title of honour, 165 Earles by office, 502 c Earles or Eorles hereditary, 166 Earles how created, ibid. Earle Apostolicall, 239 e Earle Imperiall, ibid. Earles Coln, 450 d Earles dike, 714 d Earth, 155 Earth turning wood into stone, 401 e Earth a rampier in Cornwall, 189 Easton Nesse, 467 a East-riding, 709 East-Angles, 456, 458 Eaton in Bedfordshire, 401 a Earth by divers occasions alte∣red, 1 Eatons what they be, 63 Eaye, 467 f Saint Ebba an holy virgin, 743 a Ebchester, ib. Ebissa, 128 Eboracum, or Eburacum, that is, Yorke, why so called, 702 d Eccles, 478 e Eccleshall, 584 c Ecclesiasticall livings heredita∣rie, 595 f Echingham Baron, 320 Eclipses of the Sunne in Aries disasterous to Shrewsbury, 598 a Edelfleda or Elfleda, a noble La∣die, 610 d Eden a river, 776, 760 c Edenborgh frith, 56 Edgecombs. 193 Edge an hill, 561 b Edgar Eathling or Aethling 146 Edindon, 244 e Edith virgin, a Saint, 582 b Edith King Eadgars daughter, 246 d Edith a Lady professed, 395 c Edmund of Langley his devise and presage, 510 Edmund Crouchbacke King of Sicily deluded by the Pope, 756 b K. Edmunds martyrdome, 467 Saint Edmund a most Christian King and martyr, 460 c S. Edmunds liberty, 459 c S. Edmunds bury, ibid. S. Edmunds dike, 490 f Edmund King of England pite∣ously slaine, 364 a K. Edmund Ironside, 143 Edmund of Woodstocke Earle of Kent, 353 a Edrick Streona, 595 d Edrick Sylvaticus, 624 e K. Edward the Confessour where borne, 377 a Edward Confessour, 143 b Edward Earle of Warwicke be∣headed, 670 e Edward the First, King of Eng∣land his praises, 776 a Edwardston, 463 a K. Edward the Second entombed, 361 a. murdered, 363 b K. Edward the Third his ver∣tues, 297 d. a most renowned Prince. 278 Edwin the Prince made away by his brother Athelstan, 213 e Egbert calleth his kingdom Eng∣land, 138. vanquisheth the Danes, 143 Effingham, 296 f Egelricke a wealthy Bishop of Durham, 742 Egertons whence descended, 603 Egleston, 736 e Egremond an arch-rebell, 724 d Egremont castle, 766 a The Eight, 360 b Eimot a river, 762 d Ela Countesse of Salisbury, 244 a Queene Elizabeth an excellent Prince, 256 f. her vertues, 292. 297. 298. her tombe, 430. b Ellandunum, 446. d Elen a river, 769. c Elden hole, 557. e Elenborough, 769. c Elephants bones found in Britain, 447. c Ellen hall, 584. c Eliot his conceit of the name of Britaine, 5 Ellesmer a Baronie, 592. a Sir Th. Egerton Baron Ellesmer ibid. North Elmham a Bishops See, 466. d Elmeley, 650. e Elmesley, 722. d Elmet a territory, 694. e Elmore, 362. b Elesly, 485. d Elnemouth, 769. c Eleutherus Pope, 67 Elrich roade, 532 Elsing, 482. a Eltham, 327 Eston, 501. e Elvan, 67 Elwy a river, 679. d Emildon, 814. b Emme Mother to King Edward Confessor cleereth her selfe of incontinency, 211 Enderbies, 401 Hugh Enermeve of Deping, 533 Englishmen converted become zealous Christians, 137. Stu∣dious in Liberall Sciences, ib. Enfield, 437 English names what they signifie and imply, 139 Engelrame de Coucy first Earle of Bedford, 402. f England, 138 English Saxons returne into Ger∣many, ibid. brought thither military knowledge, learning and religion, ibid. Engins to assault in old time, 400 England full of vices, 143 England divided into Counties or Shires by Aelfred, 138 Little England beyond Wales, 652 English men whence they tooke name, 138 Englishmen the guard of the Em∣perors of Constantinople, 154 English tongue of what continu∣ance, 133 English Maior, 681. e Entweissel name of a place and Gentlemen, 746. a Equites Aurati, that is, Knights, whereupon so called, 174 Erdburrow, 522 Erdessey, 620. e Erdeswick, 583. e Eriry mountaines, 667. d Ernald Bois or de Bosco, 396. b Erewash a river, 555. c Eryngum in Cornwal, 186 Escrick, 707. Eske a river, 765. . 781. c Eslinton, 813. c Espringolds, 400. d Eresby, 541. e Ermin-streete, 64 or Erming-street, 485. c. 501. f Erminsul or Irmunsull, 64 Esquires what degree of Gentry, 176 Esquires of five sorts, ibid. Steph. de Eschalers a Baron, 485. Essex, 439 Essex Earles, 453 Essex Cheeses, 443. c Essexes Knight, 283. f Henry de Essex became a Monk, 681. d Essex, a family, 443. a Essendum, 18 Essendon, 526. d Esterford or East-Sturford, 446 Ester or Easter celebrated on the Lords day onely, 118 Eston aliâs Estanues ad turrim, 444. e Eston Nesson, 506. c Estotovils an honourable family, 533. b Estre aliâs Plaisy, 445. a Ethered vanquished and slaine, 550. e Esturmies or Sturmies, 254. f Ethelbert an insufficient King, 143 Ethelbert King, Martyr, 618. e Etocetum, 582. e Ethelbury, 728. d K. Etheldred, a vertuous Prince 216. b. his tombe, ibid. Ethelward a writer, 130 Covesham, Evesham or Eisham, 577. e Eudo Sewer to K. Henry the first, 459. e Eudo a noble Norman, 541. d Evel a towne, 221. b Evelmouth, 225. d Evenlode a river, 376. b Vale of Eisham or Evesham▪ 577 Ever or Eure a towne, 394. b Evers Barons, ibid. e Everingham a Baron, 550. d Evers Barons whence descended, 453. b Evers of Axholm, 813. b Evers noble Barons, 738. e Ewelme or Newelme, 388. c Ewias, 631. c Ewias Castle, 617. d Eustach de Hach a Baron, 246. b Eustow aliâs Helenstow, 40 . a Exchequer Court, 177.178 Ex a river, 203. b Exceter Colledge in Oxford, 381 Exceter, 203. f Exceter Dukes, 205. d Exceter Marquesse, 206. a Exceter Earle, ibid. a Exminster, ibid. b Exmore, 203. c Eythorp in Buckingham-shire, 395. f F. OF Faculties the Court, 181 Fairefax a family of gen∣tlemen, 692, b. 723. d Falco or Falques Brent a faith∣lesse men▪ 400. c. 812. b Falcons of the best kind, 644. b Falkesley bridge, 582. a d Falemouth, 189 Fanhop Baron, 401. d Farendon, 279. e Farmors Knights, 506. e Fastineog, 666. a Fastidius a Bishop of Britaine, 84 Faulconbergs Barons, 714. a Faustus a good sonne of a bad fa∣ther, 642. c Fawey, 190 Fawsley, 508 Faux what it signifieth, 692 Fekenham Forest, 574. f Feldings Knights, 519. f Fenwick Hall, 809. d Fenwicks a family, ibid. Ferrars Barons of Grooby, 520. f Henrie Ferrars of Baddisley a gentleman well descended, and as well seene in Antiquities, 568. d Rob. Ferrars how enterred, 569 Lords Ferrars of Chartley, 584. f Fernham Roiall, 394. d Fernham why so called, 294. e Fetherston Haugh, 799. e Fetherstons a family, ibid. Fettiplaces a family, 220. . 281. Feversham, 334. d Fieldon a part of Warwick-shire, 561. b. 223. a Feldon, 561. b Fenis or Fienlesse, 223. a. 316. b Fienes, Barons Dacres, 813. b Sir Richard Fienes or Fenis Baron Say and Sele, 376. f The File, 753. a File what it signifieth, 715. a Files, ibid. Filioll, 217. c Finborrow, 607. b Finchdale, 742. a Firr trees found in Axelholm, 544. b Fisburgings, 819. c A Fish poole or Mere by Saint Albans dried up, 411. c Fishes with one eye a peece, 667 Fishgard, 654. c Fish pond foreshewing the death of Monks, 609. c Fittons a family, 610 Fitz-Alans Earles of Arundel, 309.310.589. f Fits-herberts an ancient family, 553. d Sir Anthony Fitz-herbert, ibid. a most famous Lawier, 359. b Fitz-Hugh, Baron, 730. d Fitz-Harding Lord of Berkley, 362. d Robert Fitz-Haimon slaine, 368 Fitz-Teke, 406. c Robert Fitz-Stephen the first of Norman race that attempted Ireland by way of Conquest, 657. f Rob. Fitz-Walter de Clare, 407 Fitz-Walters Barons, 446. c Fitz-Walters ensigne-bearers of London, 215. d Fitz-Lewis a family, 442. e Geffrey Fiz-Peter Earle of Es∣sex, 454. b. a worthy Iusticer of England, ibid. c Fitz-Stephen a writer, 427. b Fitz-Paine Baron, 215. d Fitz-Warins, 281. b Sir Fulque Fitz-Warin, 598. b Fitz-Williams an ancient family, 690. a Rich. Fitz-Punt a Norman, 618 Henry Fitz-Roy, Earle of Not∣tingham & duke of Richmond, 551. d Flamborough head, 714. Flamstead, 414. b Flatbury, 578. b Plavi s Sanctus, 341. d Fleame dike or Flight dike, 490 Fleet a riveret in London, 423. f Flemings a family, 646. e Fleming, 202. d. 755. d Flemingston or Flemston a towne 646. e Flemings planted in Wales, 654.652. d Flemish high way in Wales, 652 Flint shire, 679 Flint castle, 680. d Flint Earles, 681. f Flixton, 715. b Flixton or Faelixton, 468. b Floddon an hill, 816. a Floddon field, ibid. Florus a Poet, ibid. Flotes a kind of boates, 597. b Faelix Bishop of East England, 466. c. 480. c Fluor found in Darby shire, 557 Foix a family, 759 Foliambs a great family, 556. b Foliots a familie, 575. c 482. a Folkingham, 535. a Folkstone, 349. b A Font of Brasse in Saint Al∣bans Church, 412 d Forcatulus his conceit of the name Britaine, 5 Fordington, 212. d Ford castle, 815. e The Foreland of K nt, 342. d Fornesse, 754. Fornesse Fels, 755. a Sir Iohn Fortescue, 396. e Forses or waterfalls, 759. f Forefenses, 780. the first. ibid. the second, 790. a. the third. ibid. b. the fourth, 16. c Forestwhat it is, and why so called, 293. c Forest lawes, ibid. d Forests in Sussex, 320. d Fortunie a Tourneament, 407. d Fortunate Ilands, 4 Forty foot way, 511. f. 515. a. 64 Fosse dike, 537. f Fosse wad what it is, 569. c Fosse a river, 702. b Fosse way, 562. b The fosse, 366. a. 64 Foules delicate, 543. b. c Fossards a family, 709. b Fotheringhay Castle, 510. d File of Fouldrey, 755. c Foulnesse a river, 711. b Foulnesse an Isle, 443. c A fountaine ebbing and flowing, 643. f. 650. b Fountaines Abbey, 700. e Fowy, 190 Fracastorius his opinion of stone-fish, 363. Framlingham castle, 465. d Fraomarius K. of the Almans, 79 Frankners in Britain, 72. de∣stroied, 73 Fredrick the first Emperour, held Pope Adrian the fourth his stirrup, 415. a Franks a people of Germany, 122 where they dwelt, 130 Freedstol, 712. a French or Gaulifh provinces cast off the Roman yoake, 86 Free waren what it was, 694. d Frea or Frico a Saxon Goddesse, 135. how pourtraied, ibid. Fremund vilanously slaine, 561. e registred a Saint, ibid. Fremantle, 272. c Frechevils or Freshwels a fa∣mily, 555. f Fresh water Isle, 274. a Fretherick Abbat of Saint Al∣bans, 414. c Frevils a family, 582. c. d Friday, 135 Fredeswide a Saint, 378. a Frisones come into Britaine, 131 Frodesham Castle, 610. a Frome river, or Frau, 212. a Frompton, ibid. Iul. Frontinus his exploit against the Silures, 54 Froshwel a river, 443. d. 444. d Frowen Shoale, 347. Fulham, 421, c Funarius, a name of Gratianus, 77 Furnivalls a noble family, 587. c Furnivall Barons, 394. d G GAbrantovici, why so called, 714. d Gabrosentum, 743. c. 810. a Gael, 121 Gaesatae, 18 Gages, 315. c Gaidelach, 121 Gaideli, that is, Scots, 123 Gainsborough, 543. c Gaiothel, 121 Gaiothlac, ibid. Gal a sweet smelling shrub, 544 Gallath why so called, 23 whence derived, 20 Galba, ibid. Galle, 22 Galls, ibid. Gauls commended, 22. their ex∣ploits, ibid. Gauls named Gomori and Cim∣bri, 11. their religion, 12 Galgacus a valiant Britain, 47 his oration, 58 Gallana, 802 a Gallatum, 761 d Galtres forest, 723 d Galvus, 20 Gamages, a family, 643 Gamlinghay, 485 d Ganoc, 669 f Gaol, 22 Gargraves, knights, 691 a Garianonum, 477 a. b Garlick growing in plenty, 213 d Order of the Garter, 278 c Garum a, 20 Garw, ibid. Gascoignes an ancient family, 698 f Gasehound, 263 f Gastenoies, a family, 553 c Gateshead, 743 b Gavelkind, 325 d Gaunlesse a riveret, 738 d Gaunts Barons of Folkinham, 535 a Gawthorp, 698 f Geat or Black Ambre, 719 d Gehennae, 21 Geddington, 509 f Gedney or Godney Moore, 230 c Geduch, 18 Geffray ap Arthur, or of Mon∣mouth, 5. his narration of Bru∣tus and the name of Britaine discussed, 5 b Geldable a part of Suffolke, 459 c Gelt a river, 783 b Geneu what it signifieth, 190 Saint Genovefs Fernham, 461 e Genounia a Province in Britain, 66 Gentlemen, 177 George Duke of Clarence mur∣dred, 462 e. drowned in a butt of Malvesey, 510 e Saint Germain in Britain, 132 192, 410 c. he rebuketh Vor∣tiger, 624 d. preached against Pelagians, 378 f. 707 d Germans called Scythians, 122 Germans whence they tooke their name, 26 German words agreeing with the Persian, 129 Gernegans knights, 729 d Gernons a family, 537 b Gernston, 472 f Gerrards Bramley, an house and Baronie, 584 b Gerrard de Rodes, 541 c Gerrard a Baron, 584 c Gessi, 18 Gessum, ibid. Gessoriacum, 348 a, d. it is Bo∣logne or Bullen, ibid. d Geveny or Gevenny a river, 635 Gevissi, 294 c Giants in Cornwall, 186 Giants teeth and bones, 451 d Giddy hall, 441 f Giffards a family, 581 e Giffards, 365 f Giffards Earles of Buckingham, 397 d Giffards Barons, 396 a. 541 b Gilbertines a religious order, 534 c Gildas, 8. a learned professor, 378 f Gilden vale, 617 e Gillesland Barony, 782 e Gillesland Lords, 786 e Gilling, 730 a Gillingham forest, 214 d Gilbourgh, 507 f, a fort there, 508 a Gipping see Orwell, Gipping a village, 463 Girald of Windesor a valiant Captaine, 652 a Giralds or Giraldines a noble and renowned family, 652 b Giraldus Cambrensis Archdea∣con of Brecknock, 627 b Giraldus Cambrensis, 8 Girwy, 743 Gervii what people, 491 c Gisburgh, 721 b Gises a family, 362 b Gisleberi of Clare Earle of Hert∣ford, 407 b Githa Earle Goodwins wife, 207 b Glanoventa, 812 d Glanvils a family, 469 a Glasse, 19 Glasse houses, 306 e Glamorganshire, 641 a Glanford a towne, 543 a Glasiers first brought into Eng∣land, 743 a Glastenbury Abbey, 226 a Glastum, that is, woad, 19 Glawn, ibid. Gledaugh, 652 c Glediau, 215 f Glemham, a towne and familie, 465 e Glen, a river, 534 d. 815 d Glendal, ibid. Glocester shire, 357 a Glocester Citie, 360 d Glocester Earle, 368, c. d &c. Glocester Dukes, 369 c Glocester Hall in Oxford built and enlarged, 382 a Gluis, 20 Godiva the wife of Earle Leo∣frick, 543 d. she freed Coven∣try from Tributes, 568 a Gods house, 268 c Godstow Nunnery, 376 b Godmanchester, 498 b Godmanham, 711 c Godolcan or Godolphin hill, 189 Godrick or Goodrick a good and devout man, 74 a Godrus a Danish K. Christened, 223 Godwin or Goodwin Sands, 340 f Godwin or Goodwin the Earle of Kent his treachery, 295 c his equivocation, 307 a, his frandulent fetch to get Bark∣ley, 36 e Gold-Cliff, 634 e Gold and silver veines, 767 b Golden Harnish found, 816 c Gold and silver Mines in Corne∣wal, 186 Gomer and his posterity, 10 Gomer what it signifieth, ibid. Goodwick, 481 c Gorlois Prince of Cornwal, 195 Gorlston, 468 d Gorges a family, 364 Gormo or Guthrum the Dane, 463 d Gormod, 21 Gormon the Dane, 498 d Gorombery, 413 d Goropius Becanus what he think∣eth as touching the name of Britaine, 5 Goths language hath some resem∣blance of Welsh and Duch, 123 Government of the Roman Em∣pire under and after Constan∣tine the Great, 76 A Goth depainted, 123 Goths a noble Nation, 123 Goths and Vandals the same, ib. they came from the Getae, 130 Gourmand, 21 Gournaies or Gornayes, 222 e Matthew Gournay, 222 f. 364 Hugh de Gornay a traitour, 472 Gouttes what they are, 237 b Gower, 646 a Grace Dieu, somtime a Nunnery 521 f Grafton, 506 Grafton in Worcestershire, 574 e Grandebeof a Baron of Norman∣dy, 712 c Grandison Lord his descent, 286 b Grandison Lords. 617 d Iohn Grandison Bishop of Exce∣ter, 203 b. 206 d Grand-Sergeanty, 406 c Grant a river. 486 a Grancester, 486 b Grantham, 537 d Hugh Grantmaismill, or Grant∣maisnill, 518 c Granvill, 645 f Granvils a family, 646 Gratianus sirnamed Funarius, and why, 77. perfidiously slaine by Andragathius, 81 Gratianus a Britain declared Emperour by the Army, 84 Gravesend, 329 b Grahams a family, 781 Gregory the great a means of the Englishmens conversion to Christ, 136 Greleyes a family, 746 b Greeklade, see Creeklade. Greeks inhabited the Coasts, and along the Isles. 27 Greekes arrived in Britain, 28 Griesley Castle, 553 c Griesleys an ancient family, ib. e Grenvils. 196 a West Greenwitch, 326 d. Green∣witch, 326 d Greenes a wealthy family, 507 a Greenes Norton, ibid. Greenes noble Gentlemen, 510 c Grenhaugh Castle, 753 a Greshams Colledge. 4 5 b Greshenhal, 482 a Greve what it signifieth, 330 a Sir Foulk Grevil a worthy knight 517 e Sir Foulk Grevil father and son worshipfull knights, 565 f Greys of Grooby, 520 f Sir Henry Grey Baron Grey of Grooby, 521 a Greys of Sandacro, 553 d Greys Earles of Kent, 553 c Th. Grey of Ruthin Marquesse Dorset, 217 e Henry Grey Marquesse Dorset and Duke of Suffolk, 217 f 470 c. beheaded, 217 Greyes Barons of Wilton, 396 d. their badge, 621 a. 396 d Iohn Grey Earle of Tankervil, 663 d Greystocks Barons, 778 c Greystock Castle, 778 b S. Grimbald, 378 c Grimsby, 542 c Grimstons-garth, ibid. Grimstons a family, 714 a Griphins a family, 507 b. 607 e Grismunds tower, 366 d Gr n and Gronnes what they sig∣nifie, 486 b Grooby, 520 f Grossement Castle. 630 b Grossvenours, commonly called Gravenours, a famous family, 604 b Grosthead or Grostest a worthy Bishop of Lincoln, 540 b. c Ground most fat and battle, 478 Ground burnt for tillage, 675 c Gruffin ap Conan a noble Prince of Wales, 670 a Guadiana, 297 a Guaine, 21 Gwain, ibid. Gualt what it signifieth, 20 Guarth what it signifieth, 563 b Guarthenion why so called, 624 Guash, See wash. Gueda wife to Earle Goodwin, 363 b Guenliana a woman of manly courage, 649 c Grerif, 21 Guerir, ibid. Gwif, 19 Guild hall in London, 435 a Guilford, 295 b Guilfords a family, 352 b Guineth Uranc, 19 Guineth, 659 f Guiniad fishes, 666 b Guiscard of Engolism, 502 c Gundulph Bishop of Rochester, 333 a Gunora a Norman Lady, 620 c Gunpowder treason, 754 a Gunters a family, 628 f Guorong what it signifieth, 325 c Guortimer defeateth Hengist & the Saxons, 332 a. where buri∣ed, 340 a Guvia, 19 Gwin, a colour, 26 Guoloppum, 132 Guy Brient a Baron, 212 e Sir Guy of Warwick, 267 a. 564 Guy cliff, or Gibcliff, 564 Gyn ecia, 263 c H HAcomb, 202 e Hadseigh, 441 b Hadley, 463 d Pope Hadrian the fourth choked with a flie, 415 a Hadugato a Duke or Leader of the English Saxons, 138 Hagmond Abbay, 594 Haile a river, 193 Haduloha, 138 Haimon Dentatus, 641 c Robert Fitz Haimon subdueth Glamorganshire, 641 d Hakeds a kind of Pikes, 499 Haledon, 80 d Hales Monastery, 197 e. 365 a Halesworth, 467 c Halifax, 691 f Halifax law, 69 b Halton hall, 808 f Halyston, 812 f Hamden a towne and family, 395 Hameldon hils, 215 c Hamon, 260 f Sir Hamon Mascy, 610 c Hampton in Herefordshire, 620 Hampton Court, 420 b Hamsted hills, 421 b Hanging walls of Mark Antony, 763 c Hanley Castle, 577 b Hanmere a place and family, 68 Hannibal never warred in Bri∣tain, 32 Hans a river, 587 c Hansacres a family, 578 b Hansards a family, 543 a Hantshire, 258 Hanwell, 376 e Hanworth, 420 b King Harald slaine, 317 a Harald Lightfoot, 379 b Harald Haardred, 707 d Harald the Bastard, 143 Harald Goodwins sonne usurpeth the crowne of England, 145 His worthy and Princely parts, 146 Harborrow or Haaburgh, 517 c Harbotle a place and familie, 812 f Andrew of Harcla Earle of Carlile a traitour, degraded, 780 c Harcourts, 584 e Harden or Hawarden, 680 e Hardes ancient Gentlemen, 339 d Harde-Cnut his death, 303 b his immoderate feasting, ibid. Th. Harding, 208 e Fits Hardings Barons of Bark∣ley, 223 a Hard Knot a mountain, 765 e Hardwick a towne, 555 f. and a family, ibid. Haresfield, 419 c Harford West, 653 b Haringtons or Haveringtons a family, 755 d Haringtons Barons, 526 b. of old descent, ibid. Harington Lord, 206 e Sir Iohn Harington Baron Ha∣rington of Exton, ibid. Haringworth the honour of the Zouches Barons, 414 a Harleston, 472 e Harlestons a family, ibid. Harold Ewias, 617 d Harold a Gentleman, ibid. Harptree, 223 d Harrow on the hill, 420 a Harrowden, 510 a Hartle pole, 738 b Harts hall in Oxford, 381 d Harewich, 451 e Harewood castle, 698 e Haslingbury, 453 d Hastings a noble family in times past, 584 c Hastings Lords of Abergevenny, 568 e Hastings Baron of Loughborow, 394 c Sir Edward Hastings sole Baron thereof, 521 b Baron Hastings and Hoo, 319 b Sir william Hastings Lord Ha∣stings, 318 f Hastings great Gentlemen in Sussex, ibid. Hastings a towne whence it tooke the name, 317 f Rape of Hastings, 318 d. Lords thereof, ibid. George L. Hastings first of that name Earle of Huntingdon, 503 a Hatfield Bradock, 453 e Bishops Hatfield, 406 f Hatfield Poveril, 445 c Hatherton, 607 e Hatfield Chace, 690 e Hatley S George, 485 d Hatterel hils, 6 1 c Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chauncellor of England, 508 his commendation, ibid. his Monument, 509 a Havelock a foundling, 542 d Haverds a family, 628 e Haudelo, Lord Burnell, 330 c Havering, 441 Hawghton Conquest, 401 e Hawghlee Castle, 464 a Sir Iohn Hawkwood, 450 b Haulton a towne and castle, 611 Haure, 21 The Haw, 200 Hawsted, 450 d Hawthorn at Glastenbury, 227 e Hay a towne, 627 f Hay castle, 766 f Headon a towne, 713 c Healy castle, 583 e Hartly castle, 760 d Heavenfield, 806 d Hebrews called Huesi wherefore, 23 Heidons or Heydons Knights, 479 b Sir Christopher Heidon, 326 c Heil an Idol of the Saxons, 212 Heilston or Hellas, 189 Heina a religious votary, 699 e Heitsbury, 245 d Hieu a religious woman, 738 b Helbecks, 727 Helbeck a crag, 784 b Helena the mother of Constantine the Great borne at Colchester, 451 a Helena a devout Empresse, 74 Helenum, 187 Helion a family, 452 a Hell-Kettles deepe pits▪ 737 Helmet of gold found, 537 e Helvius Pertinax employed in Britan, 66. Propraetor in Bri∣tan, 67 Hemingston, 464 a Hempe the best, 210 d Hempsted, 414 c Hen-Dinas, 588 b Heneti whence they tooke name, 26 Hengham Lords, 472 f Hengist and Horsa brethren, 127. they signifie an horse, ibid. Hengrave, 461 Hengston hill, 196 d Henningham, 450 a Henly in Arden, 566 a Henly hundred, 389 a Henly upon Tamis, 389 b King Henry the sixt his vertues, enterred and translated, 294 d King Henry the seventh his ver∣tues, 297 f Henry the fourth Emperour en∣terred in Chester, 605 c Henry of Lancaster claimeth the crowne of England, 680 d Henry Fitz-Roy, 240 b King Henry the second his com∣mendation, 284 e Henry Prince rebelleth against King Henry the second his fa∣ther, 465 a Henry the seventh proclaimed King, 518 c King Henry the sixt twice taken prisoner by his owne subjects, 509 e Heorten, 738 b Heorthus, 135 Heptarchie of the Saxons descri∣bed, with severall shires under every Kingdome, 157 Heptarchie of the Saxons, 136 reduced to a Monarchie, 138 Herbert Bishop of Norwich, 475 a Herbert Losenga Bishop, 472 a Herbert Baron of Shurland, 334 b Herberts Earles of Penbroch, 359 a Sir Philip Herbert Baron of Shurland, & Earle of Mont∣gomery, 663 b Herberts an honourable family in Wales, 655 d Le Herbert a way in Wales, 665 f Hercules whether ever any, 207 c Herefordshire, 617 Hereford Citie, 618 e Hereford Earles, 621 b. c. &c. Hereford Duke, 622 a Hereford Viscounts, ibid. Herring fishing by Hollanders, &c. 717 f Herrings in Yarmouth, 478 a Herrings frequent our coast, 718 a Herlaxton, 537 d Herons or Heirons a family, 806 b. 815 e Herlot a, 197 b Hermae, 64 Herst Monceaux, 315 a Herst what it is, ibid. Hertlebury castle, 574 b Hertford shire, 405 Hertford towne, 407 a Hertford Earles, 415 e called Earles of Clare, ibid. Herty point, 207 b Doctor Hervey his Causey, 489 c Hervey first Bishop of Ely, 493 d Herward a valiant Englishman, 533 a Heston, 420 a Hesus, 17 Hesselwood, 696 c Hous, 17 Heveningham a towne and fami∣ly, 467. c Hexhamshire, 799. d Hextold a river, 807. d Hextoldesham, ibid. Heyford Warin, 377. a Heyford Purcell, 377. a Hides a family, 281. a Hide what it is, 158, 339. e Highgate Castle, 778. c High Crosse, 518. a High Dike a streete-way, 534. a 64 High ridge, ibid. Highham a towne and family, 463. c Highham Ferrars, 510. b High-land men, 119.126 Higra 707. c. What it is, 357. e Saint Hilda a shee Saint, and her miracles, 718. e Hills erected, for what purpose, 406. e Hildersham, 489. e Hildeards ancient Knights, 713. f Hilton a Castle and familie, 742. e Himilco never in Britaine, 33. Hinchingbrooke, 497. d Hindersket or Hunderdskell a Castle, 723. e Hinkley a Baronie, 518. c Hith or Hide a towne, 349. b Hith what it signifieth, ibid. Hitching, 406. c Ho, 329. c Baron Ho, 318, 319. Hoes a family, 542. c Hobarts Knights, and Atturneys Generall to Kings, 476 Sir Edward Hoby Knight, 286. b 334. a Hobelars, 272.275. b Hocke and Hocks old English for mire and dirt, 402. a Hoch Norton, 375. a Hockley in the hole, 402. c Hodde hils, 215. c Hodesdon, 408. d Hodingdon, 578. c Hodlestons an ancient familie, 699. e. 765. d Hodengs a family, 394. c Hodnet a towne and family, 594. b Hodney a river, 628. a Hoel the good Prince of Wales, 650. c Holburne or Oldburn, 432. f Holcrofts an ancient family, 608. d Holcroft a place and family, 747. d Holdernesse a promontorie, 713. c Holdenby house, 508. e Holdernesse a promontory, 713. c Holdernesse honour, 715. b Holes within the Ground, 440. d Holland a part of Lincoln-shire, 529. why so called, ibid. Hollands a great family, 519. b and most noble, 749 Iohn Holland of Denshire, 205. a his coate of armes, ibid. d Iohn Holland Duke of Exceter and Earle of Huntingdon, 205. d Henrie Holland Duke of Ex∣cester ibid. his miserable case, ibid. f Iohn Holland halfe brother to King Richard the second, be∣headed at Plaisi, 445. b Hollands, Knights, 353. b Hollands Earles of Kent, ibid. Iohn Holland the younger his stile, 502. f Henrie Holland Duke of Exce∣ster his fall, 502. f Thomas Holland Earle of Kent and Duke of Surrey, 304. . be∣headed, 304. c Holme Cultraine Abbey, 773. a Holmesdale, 294. b Holme Pier Pount, 548. f Holme castle, 296. f Holmes Chappell, a towne, 609. a Holme Lacy, 621. a Holt in Denbigh shire, 677. b Holt castle, 594. b Holly head, 673. a Holy Island, 814. e Hooten, 606. e Hope castle, 681. a Horne church, 441. f Horne castle, 541. c Hornby castle, 753. f Honorius Emperor, 83. succour∣eth the distressed Britains a∣gainst invasion of Barbarians, 86 Honoriaci what Souldiours, 118 Honoriani, 127 Horse running, 723. d Horse, the badge or cognisance of the old Dukes of Saxonie, 135 Horse heath, 489. e Horton, 691. f Hote-Spur, 596. c Hothams a family, 711. d. 721 Howards a Noble Family, 472. c Henrie Lord Howard, Earle of Northampton, 516. e Henry Baron Howard, of Marn∣hil, 215. c Charles Lord Howard Earle of Nottingham, 551. d Tho. Vicount Howard of Bindon, 213. a Howards Earles of Surrey, 304. e Thomas Lord Howard of Wal∣den, 452, e. 470. d. Earle of Suffolke, ibid. William Lord Howard of Na∣worth, 783. b Iohn Lord Howard, duke of Nor∣folk, the first of that house, 483 slaine, ibid. Thomas Howard his sonne van∣quished the Scots, 483. c Henrie Howard Earle of Sur∣ry a learned Nobleman, ibid. Tho. Howard last duke of Nor∣folke, ibid. Houden and Houden-shire, 710. c Houghton, 480. a Howgill castle, 762. c Howley, 693. e Howty, a brooke, 608. e Hubert de Burge Earle of Kent, 352 Hubba the Dane, 208. f Hubbestow, ibid. Huckstow forest, 592. c Huddleston, 696. c Huesi, 23 Hugh the Norman, 212. d. a traitour, 205. a Hugolin, or Hugh Spenser, 642, b Hugh Earle of Shrewsbury slain, 672. d Hull the river, 711. c Hull, the towne, 712. d Humfrey Duke of Glocester and his stile, 369. c. The good duke and a favorer of learning, 382 his death, 561. c Humber an arme of the Sea, 689 542. e Humel or Hymell castle, 514. b Hundreds or Centuries appoin∣ted, 158. d Hungerbourne, 255. c Hungerfords, 195 Hungerford towne, 282. e Hungerford Barons, 245. d. 282 Hunibald a bald writer, 6 Hunsh l for , 509. d Hunstanston, 418. b Hansdon, a Barons seate, 408 c Hunt Cliffe, 720. e Huntercombs, a family, 394 c 815, d Huntingdon castle in Hereford shire, 620. c Huntingdon shire, 497. e Huntingdon towne, 497. d Huntingdon Earles, 502. c Huntingfeld towne and Baron, 467. c Huntly Nab, 720, f Hurling, 186 Hurlers, 193 Hurst castle, 260. d Huscarles what they be, 576. e Hussy the first and last Baron of that name, 535. d Hyeritha a Shee-Saint, 208. b I. JAmes the sixth of Scotland, stiled King of great Britaine, 141. a mild and gracious Prince, 298. b Iames the fourth King of Scot∣land, slaine, 483. c Tho. Iames of Oxford a st dious Antiquarian, 639. Ianus with two foreheads, 97 Iaphets progenie how it was pro∣pagated, 10 Iarrow, 743 d Iberi whence they tooke name, 20 Iccius portus, in France, a port townelet, 3 Iceni, 456 Ichnild-street, 456. d Icenii Britaine discomfited, 43 Idle a river, 550. d Iermins Knights, 461. d Iermegans Knights, 468. e Ierby a towne, 769. c Iervis or Iorvalle Abbey. 729. c Ierusalem in hand to be re-edi∣fied. 79. Iestine a rebell against Prince Rhese. 641. e Iesu of Bethlems house, 297. e 410. f Iesus Colledge in Oxford, 383. b Iohn Iewell Bishop of Salisbury, 208. e. a profound Clerke, 248. e S. Iies, 193 Ikborowgh, 482. b Ike ild street, 64 Ikening street, 402. d Ikesworth, 461. d Ilands of what use, 478. d An Iland floating, 478. d Isle of Ely, 485. c. why so called, 492. f Il-bre, an Isle, 607. a Ilcester, or Ivelcester, 221. e Ilfarcomb, 207. a Ilkley, 697. c Il-street, 603. e K. Ina, 226. c Innes of Court and Chancery in London, 427. c Inborow what it is, 815. b Incubi, 17 Infants of Spaine, 164 Inglebeys a family, 535. f. 699. f Ingleborne, 242. c Ingleborrow Hill, 749. e Inglefields an ancient family, 284. c Inglini bipenniferi, 154 Inis wen, 24 Insula Caeruli, ibid. Inundations in Monmouth shire, and Somerset shire, 634. d Ioan the faire maide of Kent, 353. b Ioan de Acres, 369. b Iohannes de Sacro bosco, 692. c Iohn of Weathamsted, 7 Iohn Earle of Athol cruelly exe∣cuted, 336. a Iohn of Gaunt his stile, 757. b King Iohn his sword at Lin. 480. f King Iohn called judicially into question in France, and endi∣ted for murdering his Nephew Arthur, 733. d Saint Iohns Knights of Ieru∣salem, 428. a. 433. a Ioseph of Arimathea, 68 Ioseph Iscanus a Poet, 204. d Ioseph Scaliger, 10 Ipres towre, 319. d Wilde Ipres, 332. c. Earle of Kent 352. e Ipswich or Gipwich, 464. c Ireland, the site thereof, 56 Irke a river, 746. a Irchenfield or Archenfield, 617. e Irt a riveret, 765. e Irmunsull. See Ermin, 64 Irthing a river, 782. f Irthington, 745. e Irwell a river, 745. e Iron or Yron myn s, 581. b Isa, a river. See Usa. Isabel de Fortibus, 207. e Isan parles a rock, 763. b Isc river. See Ex. Isca Danmoniorum, 203. f Isca Silurum, 204. a Iscaw, 20 Isis haire or Isidis plocamos, 211 Isis a river, 241. c Isis a river in Glocestershire. See Ouse. Islip, 377. a Simon Islip, 332. c Is-urium Brigantum, 701. c Ithancester, 443. d Itium is whitsan, not Callais, 348 Iudeal de Totenais, 201. f Ivel the river, 221. b Iulham or Chilham, 336. b Iulia street, 639. e Iulian the Apostata usurpeth the Empire, 79. is declared Caesar, 78 Iulius Caesar attempteth Bri∣taine, 34 Iulius a Martyr in Britaine, 73 636. e Iullaber, 336. b Ivo Talboys of Anjou, 532. f Ivo a Persian Bishop, 499. a A Iury of 12. men, 153 Iustices of the Forest, 293. e Iustices ordained by Aelfred, 158 Iustices of Peace instituted by K. Edward the third, 160 Iustices of Assises, 160.179 Iustice, or chiefe Iusticer of England, 178 Iustices Itinerant, 179 Iustices in Eyre, ibid. Iustices of Goale delivery, ibid. Iustices of Nisi prius, ibid. Iutae a people in Germany, 128 why so called, 130 Ixning, 459. d K▪ KAderne, 18 Kainho a Barony, 401. d Katharine Dowager of Spaine enterred, 513 Keiana Scot, 649. b Keidelston, 553. e Keimes a Barony, 654. c Keina, a devout Virgin, 236. f Keirch, 20 Kilhop a riveret, 738. c Kelnsey, 714. a Kelsay, 543. a Ken a river, 753. f Kenchester, 618. d Kendale, or Kirkby Kendal, 759 Kendale Barons and Earles, ibid. K. Kenelm a Saint, 365. e Kenelworth, or Killingworth, 566 Kenelworth castle, ibid. Dictum de Kenelworth, 567 Kenet the river, 255 a Keninghal, 472 c Keniwalcsh vanguisheth the Bri∣tans, 221 d Kent, 323. why so called, ibid. Kentishmen right courteous and valiant, 324 c Kent Earles, 352 d Kentish Pety-kings or Potentates, 37 Kent-sand, 753 f Kentigern Bishop of Glasco, 679 c a great Clerke, 378 f Kernaw, 183 Kernellare, what it is, 753 f Kesar, for Caesar, 326 c Kesteven a part of Lincolnshire, 533 b Keston, 326 c Keswicke, 763 c Ket a rebell, hanged, 473 b Kettel, the name of a familie, 543 b Kettleby, 543 a Kettering, 510 Keven, 21 Keven Caer, 661 e Kevenles Castle, 624 a Kevin, 21 Saint Kibie an holy man, 673 a Kidderminster, 573 f. a Barony, 514 a Kidwelly, 649 Kildale Castle, 721 e Kighley, a place and family, 693 Kilgarth, 192 Killey, 816 e Kilgarran, 654 e Killingworth, See Kenelworth, Kilmain Lhoyd, 650 d Kilnsey Crag, 697 b Kilpeck a castle and family, 617 The Kings Champions, ibid. Kilton castle, 720 c Kime a noble family, 535 e Kimbolton or Kinnibantum Ca∣stle, 501 c Kindreton, 610 b Kindreton Barons, 609 b Kined a Saint, 646 c Kinefeage Castle, 644 d King what it signifieth, 163. his soveraigne power, &c. ibid. his roial prerogatives, 163 Kings of England made heires to their subjects, 485 e. f Kings in Britain during the Ro∣mans Empire there, 67 The Kings Courts of Iustice, 177 Kings Bench, 178 Kingston Lacy, 216 f Kings Cleare, 272 c Kings knight or Taine, 293 e Kingston upon Tamis, 297 b Kings Delfe, 500 b Kingston upon hull. 712 d Kings Ditch by Cambridge, 488 c Kingswood Abbey, 364 c Kinnoburga, 502 b Kinnersley, 620 c Kinton, 561 c Kirkham, 709 d Kirkby Bellers, 522 f Kirkby Morside, 722 c Kirkby the same that Pontfret, 695 c Kirkby Lonsdale, 760 c Kirkby Stephen, ibid. d Kirby Thore, 761 c Kirk Oswald, 777 f Kirkton, 532 c Kirsop a river, 781 d Kirtling, 491 b Kirton, 203 d Kits Coty house, 332 b Kitsons knights, 461 e Knarisborow Castle, 699 f Knebworth, 406 e Knevets a family, 472 c. d Knevet or Knivet, Baron of Es∣crick, 707 e Knight what degree of Gentry, 170 Knights simply so called, 173 Knights of foure sorts, 171 Knights Banarets, ibid. Knights of the Bath, 172 Knights dubbed Earles, 174 Knight a title of dignity, 175 Knights how dubbed, 176 Knights Bachelars, ibid. Knights twelve, emploied in the Conquest of Glamorgan-shire, 641 e. f Knightleys ancient knights, 508 Knighton, 623 e Kniveton a place and familie, 553 e Knocking Castle, 597 b Knoll, 328 a Knolls Barons de Rotherfield, 389 e Knots a dainty fowle, 543 c Knotsford a towne, 610 c Knute the Hardie, or Hardie Knut, 143 Knute King of the Danes van∣quisheth Ethelbert, 143 Kowain, 18 Kumero, 10 Kumbri or Kambry, 765 b Kumari, ibid. Kumeraeg, ibid. Kwrm, a British drinke, 31 L. LAberius Durus slaine by Kentishmen, Lac a riveret, 753 d Lacie, 213 d Lacies Conquerours of Ireland, 631 c Lacie the Norman, 695 d Iohn Lackland, who hee was, 255 f Lacon, a family, 591 d Lactorodum seemeth to be Stony Stratford, 397 b Laelianus an usurper in Britaine murdred, 71 Laetavia, 111 Laeti, ibid. Laetus a valiant Captaine, 69 Laeford, by contraction, Lord, 168 Lanae, 19 Lakes in Staffordsh. of a strange nature, 588 b. c William Lambard commended, 323 b William Lambard his hospitall, 327 f Lambith, 303 b Lambley Nunnery, 799 Lamborne, 283 f Lambourn Manour, 440 c Lampreies, 574 c Lane the name of a family, 509 f Lanandiffry, 649 d Lancashire, 745 Lancaster or Loncaster towne, 754 b Lancaster Lords, 755 f Lancaster Earles, 756 Lancaster Dukes, 757 Lancham, 463 d Lanchester, 742 Landaff, 642 d Lands end, 188 Lanercost Abbey or Priory, 782 c 785 c Langerston, 465 a Abbots Langley, 414 f Kings Langley, ibid. f Langley, 592 a Langho, 750 a Langtons a family, 752 e Langanum, 668 b Lanheath, 491 a Lapis Tituli. See Stonar. Lacelles a family, 707 e. 724 c Latham, 749 a Latimer what it is, 598 Latimers, a towne, 394 e Latimers de Corby, a family, 507 b Latimers, Lords, 721 f. 729 d Latimer a sirname, 598 c Lavatrae, 732 d Laver a river, ibid. e Lavellin an high hill, 767 f Lawleyes, a family, 591 f Lawlesse Court, 441 e Lawes of England in a tripartite division, 153 Law-courts of England, 177 Lawes, that is, Heapes of stones, 802 b De la Lawnds, a family, 542 c Laurence Noel, repayrer of our Saxons language, 188 Laxton or Lexinton a towne and name of a family, 550 Layth, 21 Lea or Ley a river, 406 e Lea, the name of a family, 592 d Leach, 21 Lead of Darbyshire, 556 e League, 21 Leakes Knights, 556 b Leam, the rever, 507 e Leama brooke, 561 d Leamington, ibid. d Leanminster, 17 Leckhamsted, 396 e Leddets, a family, 507 b Long-Leat, 245 a Ledden a river, 620 e Ledbury a towne, ibid. Lee, Knight, 280 c Lee a place and family, 610 c Sir Henry Lee, 395 f Leeds Castle, 331 c Leeds, 694 e Leegh, 441 c Leez, 445 c Legeolium, 695 a Leibourne, 332 c Leiden Castle built by Hengist, 130 Leightons knights, 593 a Leighton Buzard, 402 e Leighton in Huntingdon-shire, 501 d Leiton, 439 f Leightons a family, 667 d Leicestershire, 517 Leicester towne, 519 d Leike a towne, 587 c Lemster or Leinster, 619 f Lemster Ore, 620 a Lemster bread, 620 Lenae, 17 Leneham, 331 a Leofrike Earle of Mercians, 567 e Leofrike first Bishop of Excester, 204 d Leofrike Lord of Brane or Burne, 533 a Leoftane Abbot of S. Albanes, 393 c Leolin Prince of Wales his beha∣viour to King Edward, 363 e Lean Vaur a fabulous Giant, 604 Leon Vaur what it signifieth, ib. Leonell Duke of Clarence, 462 d Leprosie why termed Elephanti∣asis, 522 d. when it came first into England, ibid. Lestoff, 468 d Leskerd, 191 Lestuthiel, 190 Lettuy what it is, 399 f Leuca, 21 Leven a river, 781 c. 782 b Leveney a river, 628 c Levensand, 754 f Lever Maur, 67 Leventhorps a family, 408 c S. Lewis King of France taken prisoner, 249 e Lewis of France his pretended ti∣tle to the Crowne of England, 340 Lewis a towne, 313 e Lewknors, 312 e Ley-mouth, 440 a Lhan what it signifieth, 631 d Lhan Beder, 657 d Lhan Badern vaur, 658 a Lhan Stephen, 650 c Lhan Devi Brevi, 657 b Lhanthony Abbey, 631 c Lhan Vais, 672 e Lhan Vethlin, 662 d Lhan Heron, 193 Lhan Stuphadon or Launstave∣ton, 196 c Lhein, 668 b Lhewellin ap Sisil Prince of Wales, 680 a Lhewellin ap Gryffith the last British Prince of Wales, 670 b Lhewellin last Prince of Wales of Brittish race, 624 c. slaine, ib. Lhuyd his opinion concerning the name of Britain, 5.24 Library in Oxford furnished, 381 Lichfield, 585 b. an Archiepis∣copall See, 585 d Lickey Hill, 574 d Lid what it is, 491 d Lid river, 199 d. 781 f Lida towne, 351 a Lid Castle, 781. Liddesdale, ibid. Lidgate a village, 461 f Iohn Lidgate a Monke, ibid. Liesnes Abbey, 328 b Lievtenants in every County or Shire instituted by King Ael∣fred, 159 Lilborne, 515 c Lime river and towne, 210 b Limestone great store, 694 f Limits of the Roman Empire, 789 e, d. see Scotland. Limseies a family, 567 e Lime a port towne, 549 e Line or flax of the best, 620 a Lillinstone, 396 c Lincolnshire, 529 Lincoln City, 538 b. whence the name is derived, ibid. Lincoln Earles, 544 e▪ f Lindsey a part of Lincolne-shire, 537 f Robert of Lincoln, 313 d Lincolne Colledge in Oxford, 381 Linstock Castle, 778 a Lingeins a family, 665 d Lin 480 d. why so called, ibid. Old Lin, 480 King Lin, ibid. Linnum Episcopi, ibid. Lin peris poole, 668 d Lin a river, 547 c D la Linde, 213 f Linton or Lenton a towne, 547 d Lionesse, 187 Lisls a family in the Isle of Ely, 494 d L'isle a family, 276 a L'isle of Rougmount, 490 b Listers a family, 592 e Vicount L'isle, 280 d Liver a river, 192 Littons a family, 406 e Litchfield in Hantshire, 272 c Littleborough, 549 e Lites Cary, 224 f Littletons a family, 574 d Littleton alias Westcot a learned Lawyer and a famous, ibid. Livery and seisin in old time, 340 The Lizard, 189 Llydan what it is, 111 Louder a river and family, 792 Lode workes, 184 Looghor, 646 a Lollius Urbicus Propretor in Britain, 66 Lollham bridges, 512 a London, 421 d London an ancient Colony, 50 London called Augusta, 79, 80 London stone, 423 a London wall, ibid. c London bridge, 434 a London highway from Saint Al∣banes turned out of Watling-street, 415 b London or Londres, a family, 649 d Maurice de Londres or London, ibid. c Lonchamps a family, 532 Longford a place and family, 553 d Long-Meg a stone, 777 e Longvils a family, 397 c Lonsdale, 760 Loo a river, 192 Lophamford, 467 d Lora Countesse of Leicester, a reclused votary, 339 a Lortie the name of a family, 221 d Lothbrooke the Dane, 207 a Lottery used by Saxons, 135 Lovain a family, 444 e Lovels, 374. a family, 505 d Lords of Castle Cary, 514 a Lovets a family, 553 d Loughborough, 521 d Lowland-men, 126 Louth, 542 c Lowy of Tunbridge, 330 a Lowy of Briony, ibid. Luceni in Ireland, 121 Lucensii in Spaine, ibid. Sir Rich. Lucy Lord Iustice of England became a Chanon, 328 b Lucies a family, 769 f Lucius King of Britaine, 67 Lucies Knights an ancient fami∣ly, 564 f Luculleae certaine speares, 62 Ludgate, 423 c Ludham, 478 d Ludlow, 590 c Ludlowes a family, 594 b Luffeilds, 396 f Luffenham or Leffingham, South and North, townes, 525 Lug, a river, 619 d Lugus, what it signifieth, 779 a Lullingstone, a town and family, 328 e Lumley Castle, 742 b Lumleys Barons, ibid. Lune or Lone a river, 753 c Lupicinus sent into Britaine, 78 Lupus Earle of Chester, 611 a Lusoriae naves, 811 d Luthing, a lake, 468 d 442 a Luthingland, ibid. Luton, 402 e Lutter worth, 517 f. an Episco∣pal See, 519 d Lygons a family, 577 b Th. de la Lynde, 213 f Lyquorice in great plenty grow∣ing, 550 f Lyrpoole or Litherpoole, 748 d M MAchleneth, 661 b Maclesfield, a towne and forest, 610 b Madin-boure or Madning boure, Madning money, ibid. Madock falsly dealt withall by his Guardian Iohn Earle of waren, 677 b Maeatae, 796 d Magicke practised in Britaine, 234 a Magnavills, alias, Mandevil, 452 b. Earles of Essex, 453 e Magnavil his end, ibid. f Magnentius an usurper, 77. cal∣led Taporus, ibid. a fortu∣nate Prince, 77. killed him∣selfe, ibid. Magnus a Dane, 314 c. his mo∣nument, ibid. Magoclunus a tyrant in Britain, 113 Magon a god, 803 d Mahel Earle of Hereford, 358 f Maiden Castle, 212 c Maiden Bradley, 24 Maiden way, 761 e Maiden-head or Maiden-Hith, 286 c Maidstone, 330 e Maidulph the Irish Scot, 242 c Main, what it signifieth, 569 c Maior of London first ordeined, Main Amber, 188 Malcolm Can Mor, King of Scots, 500 c Maldon, 446 e. forced by Queen Boadicia, 448 Malduit or Manduit, 570 Mallets a family, 223 e Malliveries, 700 b Malmesbury, 242 b Malpas, 603 e. Barons thereof, ibid. Maltravers Barons, 217 a Malvern hils, 577 b Malveisin, 814 a Mamignot, 326 d Maminots Barons, 332 d Mancastle, 746 b Mancester, 569 c Manchester, 746 a Manchet the finest, 420 a Manchester why so called, 747 a Mandrubatius, See Andro∣geus oppressed by Cassibili∣nus, 37 Manduites a family, 591 e Mangonells, 400 d Mannours or de Maneriis a fa∣mily, 815 e Mannours Earles of Rutland, 527 a, b. 536 b Manober Castle, 651 c Mansions what they were, 65 Mansfield a great mercate town in Shirewood, 550 b Manwarings or Memilwarings a family, 608 a Sir Peter Manwood Knight, 339 b Sir Roger Manwood Knight, ibid. Marble quarrey, 736 e Marca, 18 Marden, 620 d The Marches, 589 b Marga what it is, 536 e Margan Castle, 644 e Marga, 20 Margaret Countesse of Rich∣mond, 216 d Margaret Countesse of Salisbu∣ry beheaded, 250 d Lord Marchers, 589 c. 165 Marcley hill, 620 b. moveth ibid. Marcus made Emperour in Bri∣taine by the armies, 84 Mareschall of Harlots, 294 b Mareschall Earle of Penbroch why so named, 655 b Mareschall Earle of Penbroch slaine at a Turnament, 407 d Mary Queene of Scots her end, her tombe, 511 c. 513 b Mary Lady Fane, 330 d Mary Hall in Oxford, 381 d Mary Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, 382 b S. Maries of Radcliff, 237 Marius a mighty strong man, 779 d Markham an uncorrupt judge, Markham a village and name of family, 550 e Markham lord chiefe Iustice of England, 550 e Marle, 20.393 c Marleborough, 255 d Marleborough statute, 256 a Marlow, 393 Marmions a family, 729 e Marmions the kings Champions, 582 c Marney Baron, 213 a Marnhill, 215 c Marquesites found, 720 f Marquesse what degree of ho∣nour, 165 Marquesse how created, ibid. Marchland, 690 e Martin Bishop of Tours, against putting heretikes to death, 82 Martin Vicegerent in Britaine, stabbeth himselfe, 78 Martins, lords of Keimes, Martins a family, 654 d Martyrs in Britaine, 73 Masons first brought into Eng∣land, 743 a Massagetes, Scythians, 121 Massham, 729 c Matrafall, 662 d Mawde the Empresse, Lady of the English, 453 e. King Henry the First his wife, 284 d Mawde of Saint Valeri a stout Dame, 623 c Saint Maudit Castle, 189 Maugre Lhewellin a Castle, 623 c Mauleies Barons, 709 c Peter Mauley, 719 c Mault of Abbington, 280 a Mault how made, 485 b Maundbury, 212 c Maunsels, 641 e Maxey castle, 515 a Maximus usurpeth the Empire, 82. his vertues, ib. stiled Tre∣vericus Emperour, ibid. Maximus the usurper vanquish∣ed and put to death by Theo∣dosius, 83 Maxstock castle, 567 c Meales what they be, 479 e East-Mean Hundred, 268 f West-Mean Hundred, ibid. Meansborow Hundred, ibid. Meanuari, ibid. Meaux Abbey, 712 e Walter Medantinus an Official Earle, 621 Medaghom, 634 b Medcalfes a numerous family, 729 a Medeshandsted, alias Medeswel∣hamsted, ibid. Medeswel, a gulfe, 512 b Medley, 693 f Medvan, 67 Medway river, 329 d Meermarkes in old time, 515 c Melborn castle, 554 a Melcomb Regis, 211 c Melfield, 815 d Long Melford an hospitall, 462 Melienith, 624 a Melin, what colour, 26 Melitus a Roman, Bishop of London, 426 c Melkin a great professor of lear∣ning, 378 f Melton Mowbray, 522 e Menai, 668 c Mendip hill, 230 d Mendlesham, 465 b Meneg, 189 Menevia, 653 d Menils Barons, 721 b Merbury a place and familie, 609 f Mercians of the North, 559 b Merchenlage, 153 Merworth, 330 d Mercury had the charge of waies, 64 Mergate, 413 Merioneth shire, 667 Merivale, 569 d Merkin, 188 Merlin the Britans Tages, where borne, 649 f Mersey a river, 745 Mesey mouth, 610 b Mershland, 481 a Merton a poole, 749 d Merton, 302 d Merton Colledge, 302 Statute of Merton, 302 e Merton brooke a riveret, 554 d Metham a place and familie, 710 Metaris or Maltraith, 529 c Mettingham, 468 c Merlin Sylvester, the British Apollo, 640 a Michael de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, 7 e Saint Michaels mount, 188 Michelham, 315 d Michael Scotus a great Mathe∣matician, 773 b Middlesex, 419 Middleton Abbey built by King Athelstane, 213 Middletons a family, 698 d Middlewich, 607 f Mikel barr, 701 f Milburga a devout virgin, 591 e Sir Walter Mildmay a worthy knight, 514 c Mildred a Saint, 340 b Milstons, 681 a. 556 f Milford haven, 651 d Millum castle, 765 d Mimmes, 415 d Mineran what towne, 407 f Minchins, that is, Nuns, 362 b Minerall stones, 720 f Minshul a place and family, 608 Minster, 334 a Minster what it signifieth, 245 c Minster Lovell, 373 f Misselto of the Oke, 14 Missenden a towne, 394 c. de Missenden, Gentlemen, 394 e Mitford, 812 b Mitton, 731 b Mittons a family, 665 d Mixon, 274 e Modwena or Mowen a religious Virgin, 569 e. 586 b. her Epi∣taph, 586 c Moeles, 196 a. 221 c Mogontus, 691 d Mohuns, 190 f Mohuns or Moions, 220 d Moignes or Monkes of Essex a family, 245 b Moilenly, 676 c Moinglath, ibid. Mole a river, why so called, 297 Mold, 681 a Molineaux a family, 748 Mona Taciti, an Isle, 671 Mona subdued by Iulius Agri∣cola, ibid. Monastical life or Monkery when first professed, 603 a Monasteries what they were, 603 c Monasteries suppressed, 163 Monkchester, 810 b Monkton, See Exceter, Monkes Laymen, 603 c Monkes a family, 208 a Monkes regular or of the Cler∣gie, ibid. Monkes Weremouth, 742 f Monmouthshire, 631 Monmouth towne, 632 b. the natall place of King Henry the Fifth, 632 e Monmouth an Academy, 633 e Monow, a river, 617.631 c Montacute a place, why so called, 222 b Montacutes Knights, 510 a Montacutes a family, 222 c Earles of Salisbury, ibid. 249 Th. Montacute Earle of Salisbu∣ry slaine before Orleance, 250 Mont Aegle Barons, 753 f Montchensyes, Barons, 329 a Guarin Montchensy another rich Crassus, 463 b Montferrant Castle, 709 b Montfichets Barons, 453 c Montfichet Baron, 440 a. 809 e Montforts, 566 a Simon de Montfort Earle of Leicester, 523 e Simon de Montford the younger disloyall to his Prince, 523 e Simon Montfort another Cati∣line, 577 f. slaine, 578 a Montgomeryshire, 661 Montgomery towne and Castle, 661 f Montgomerie Earle, 663 b Montgomerie made a shire, 677 Mont Turold a fort, 513 a Montjoy, 555 Monthault Barons, 680 e Monuments or Tombs in Pauls Church in London, 426 d. &c. The Moore in Monmouthshire, 694 d Moores what they be, 759 b Mordants Barons, 399 b Moresby, a place, and name of gentlemen, 766 c, f Mooreland, 586 e Mor, 21 Morinwyr, ibid. Morimarusa, 11 Morleys, Barons, 315 c. 453 d Morisons, Sir Richard and Charles, 415 a Moregate in London, 423 d Mordant, 510 c Morton Cardinall and Archbish. of Canterbury, 212 b Morpeth, 812 c Morton Corbet, 594 e Morvils a family, 775 f Hugh Morvil, that slew Tho∣mas Becket, 777 f Mortimers Earles of March, 619 Mortimers of Attilborough, 473 b Morwic, 813 b Mortimers hole, 548 e Roger Mortimer the elder sen∣tenced to death, 624 e Roger Mortimer the last decla∣red heire apparent to the Crowne, 625 a The Mosses, 745 d. whence they come. 747 b The Moto, 783 b Mont Sorel or Mount Soar Hill, 521 a Mowbray, 304 f Mowbraies a family, the originall of their race, 723 c Mowbray much affected the Templars, 566 d Mowbraies whence descended, 481 c Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, 482 e. banished, ibid. Mowbray, 221 f Moult-Grave Castle, 719 c Mountsbay, 188.189 Moushole, 188 Mouthwy, a Commot in Wales, 665 d Moyen, 213 b Moyly Gaer, 679 c Muchelney, 222 a The Mues, 432 c Munden Furnivall, 408 b. 703 a Municipia, what they were, 409 Murdacks a family, 565 a. 409 Musards Barons of Staveley, 555 f Muschamps Barons, 815 c Musgraves villages and a fa∣mily, 760 d Musgrave Baron, ibid. d Mustard the best, 359 b Mynyd Margan, 644 e N NAdder a river, 245 d Naitanus a King of the Picts, 118 Names of families altered, 583 e Names of families taken from places, 748 a Names taken from the fathers forename, 813 b Nannius, 82 Nant Pencarn a river, 639 f Nant-wich, 607 f Natan Leod, or Nazaleod, 258 f Nations the same have sundry names, 23 Nations at first had names of their owne, 25 Navy Royall of England, 333 e Naworth Castle, 784 f Neath or Nid a river, 645 f Neath a towne, 643 d Neath land, 649 d Nectan a Saint, 207 b Nectaridius, 79 Needles, 274 e Needhams a family, 464 a 598 c Needwood, 586 Neirford a town and family, 480 481 d Neirborough, ibid. d Nen the river his head, 507 c Nen river, 497 a Nen or Aufon river overfloweth the flat Country, 513 c Nesse, 351. a Promontory, 451 d Nesta a welsh Lady and a re∣vengefull woman, 628 e Netherby, 781 d Netherwent, 640 b S. Neoth, 378 c S. Neots or Needs, 497 c Neotus an holy man, 191.497 a Neotstow, 191 Nero the Emperour how he stood affected to Britaine, 48 Nettlested, 463 c Nevern river, 654 d Nevills a family, their descent, 737 c Nevill Lord Faulconberg Earle of Kent, 353 c Rich. Nevill Earle of Warwicke, slaine, 415 d Iohn Nevill Marquesse Monta∣cute, 222 c. 403 Rich. Nevill Earle of Warwicke, ibid. Rob. Lord Nevill killed in adul∣tery, 729 c Nevills an honorable name, 769 Nevin a mercate village, 668 b Newark upon Trent, 549 c Newburg, 672 f Newborrough Abbey, 723 b Newborroughs or de Novo Bur∣go, 213 a Will. of Newborrough, 723 b Newbury, 283 d New Castle upon Tine, 809 f New Castle upon Tivy in Wales, 650 e New Colledge in Oxford, 381 e Newenden, 351 b Newenham Abbey, 207 a Newgate in London, 423 c New forrest, 259 b Newhall, 446 c Newlands, 767 a New-leame, 495 b Newmerch, 364 b Bernard Newmarch a valiant and Politicke Norman, 628 e New-market or Newmercate towne, 459 d New-market Heath, ibid. e. 490 d Newmarch the name of a fami∣ly, 221 c Newnham, 401 Newnham Regis, 562 d Newnham wells, ibid. e Newport Painel, 397 c Newport in Monmouthshire, 639 d Newport in Penbrockshire, 654 Newports a family, 605 d Newports Knights, 594 f Newsted, 547 c Neustria what country, 144 Newton in Northamptonshire, 509 f Newton in Glamorganshire, 643 Newton in Mongomeryshire, 661 Nicen Creed established, 77 S. Nicolas Isle, 200 Nicolas of Tewksbury, 202 c Nicolans Fabricius de Petrisco a good Antiquarian, 97 Nicolaa de Albeniaco an Inhe∣retrix, 364 f Nid or Neath a river, 645 f 699 e Nidherdale, ibid. e Niding a name of Reproch, 333 b Niger usurpeth the Empire in Siria, 68. slaine by Septimius Severus, ibid. Ninnius a learned professour, 378 f Ninius, 6 Ninias or Ninianus an holy Bri∣taine, 118 Nobilis Caesar, what title, 104 Nobilissimus the sonne of Con∣stantine an Emperour, 85 Nobility in England of two sorts, 164 Noels a family, 284 c Nonesuch, 287 c Normanton Fields for Dorman∣ton fields, 511 f Norris, 384 a Norris of Ricot, 384 a Normans, why so called, 144 what outrages they commit∣ted, 144 Normans renouned for Marti∣all Prowesse, 153 Normans Conquest set downe at large, 145 &c. Normandie given to Rollo, 144 Normandy awarded away from the Kings of England, 733 d Norrham a towne, 816 b North Allertonshire, 723 f. the faire there, ibid. b North, Barons, 491 b North, Hall, 415 d Northamptonshire, 505 North Elmham, 481 f North Leach, 366 b Northwales, 659 c Northfolke, 471 Northwich, 607 f Norfolke men wrangling Law∣yers, 471 c Norwich a Bishops See, 472 a Norwich what it signifieth, 473 e Norfolke Earles and Dukes, 482 b Norton in Suffolke, 464 a Norton Dany, 507 a Norwich a City much endange∣red, 475 c North-Riding, 717 Northampton, 509 a. why so na∣med, ibid. Northampton field fought, 509 e Northamptonshire, ibid. f Northamptonshire Earles, 515 e Northumberland, 799 Nosthil, 690 f Noteley Abbey, 396 a Nottinghamshire, 547 Nottingham, 547 d. why so cal∣led, ibid. Nottingham Earles, 551 b Northumberland Kings, Dukes, and Earles, 819 d Novatians hereticks, 84 Nun Eaton, 569 a The first English Nun, 339 c O OBsidianus Lapis, what Cole, 735 c Ochi hole, 230 d Ock-river, 286 c Ockham Octha, 128 Odiam, 269 e Odingsels, 567 c Odo Bishop, 333 a Odo Earle of Kent and Bishop of Baieux, 352 c Oën a welch rebell, 658 b Offa King of the Mercians his devout munificence to the Church, 410 f Offa Dike, 421 e. 623 Off Church, 561 e Offton, 463 c Ogle Castle, 812 a Ogmor, 643 a Ogle Barons, ibid. Oilway a riveret, 636 c Oisters called Mira, 449 f Oister hils by S. Albans, 413 d Oister pips in Kent, 335 a Okeham, 526 a Okenyate, 593 Oldbury, 269 d Old man of Bullen, 345 c Old Castle executed, 329 Old street or Ouldstreet, 540 Old Towne, 617 c South Okindon, 442 d O-Neall great Monarch of I∣reland, 126 Onions hole, 271 b Onions Penni s, ibid. e Orbeies a family, 607 Orcas what point, 1 Orchard the Honour of certaine Barons, 223 Ordalium, what triall, 211 a Ordulph his tomb, 199 e Ordgar, ibid. Ore a river, 465 d Oreford, ibid. Orell a family, 748 a Oriall Colledge in Oxford, 381 d Originall of Nations and their names, 4 Ormesby a towne and family, 542 c Ormeskirke, 744 a Orthotes, 139 Orton or Overton, 502 b Orwell a river, 463 f Orwell Haven, 465 a Orewood, 184 Osgodby, 543 a Osith a virgin, 451 c S. Osiths a towne, ibid. b Osney Abbey founded, 375 c Ostorius Lievtenant for the Ro∣mans, 590 a Ostorius his adventures, and ser∣vice in Britaine, 42.43. his victorie, 44. honoured with Triumphant Ornaments, 45 Oswald Bishop of Worcester, a maintainer of Monasticall life, 576 b Oswald slaine by Penda, 597 gloriously entombed, 540 f Oswald, 690 f. 806 c Oswald his Epitaph, 748 c Fables going of him, 540 f Oswaldslaw Hundred, 578 c Oswestre, 597 c Otherhalfe stone, 191 Otelands, 295 Otford, 328 e Otley, 698 d Ottadini, 796 Ottery river, 206 c Otterbourne field, 803 c Ottery S. Maris, ibid. Overburrow, 753 d Overwent, 640 b Oulney, 397 c Oundale, for Avondale, 510 c Ounsbery Hill, 721 d Ousley, 565 e Ouse a river in Glocestershire, 367 a Ouse river first called Ure and Your, 689 Ouse or Ouze river, 241 Ouse the greater, 471 b Ousbourne a riveret, 701 d Owen Iustice of the common Pleas, 592 a Owen Glendowerdwy, or Glen∣dour, a notable Rebell, 623 c Owers, 274 e Outborow what it is, 815 b Oxfordshire, 373 Oxford, 377 c. made an University, 380 f Oxford Earles, 389 d Oxney, 351 f P PAcatianus, Vicegerent or De∣puty in Britaine, 75 Padstow, 193 Palace in Westminster, 431 b Palatine what it is, 601 b Paganells or Painells, 207 b Pagetts of Beaudesert Barons, 585 a Palatine Counts, 167 Pandon gate, 810 b Pant a river or creeke, 443 b Pannonians whence they tooke name, 26 Pantulphs Barons, 594 c Pall, what it is, 336 d Paul Papinianus the great Law∣yer, 703 d Palmer, 366 a Papp Castle, 768 a Parr Earle of Essex, 454 f Parr of Kendale, 759 e Parr Lord of Horton, 509 f Parcus in Varro for a Parke, 375 e Parises, a family, 489 e Parishes first set out in England, 160 Parish Churches how many in England, 161 Parks in England, 375 e Parkers a family, 463 e Parkers, Lords Morley, 473 a Parker Baron Mont-Aegle, 754 a Parliament house, 431 c Parliament, 177 Parrham a little towne, 465 e Passham, 397 b Paston, a townelet and family, 478 f Pastwn, 21 Patern a Bishop in Wales, 668 b Pateshul, a towne and familie, 507 a Pateshulls, 399 d Pauls or Pouls Church in Lon∣don founded, 425 c Pauls steeple burnt, 425 e Paul, 68 Paul the Notarie, sirnamed Atena, 78 b Paulinus first Archbishop of Yorke, 693 d Paulinus preached Gods word in Lindesey, 539 a Paunton, a towne, 537 b Payn Peverell, 488 a Peada a Christian prince mur∣dered, 512 e Peag-Kirk, 515 a Peake in Darbyshire, 553. why so called, 556 c P asen growing of themselves, 351 b. growing out of rockes, 466 b Peché, 485 Peculiars Court, 182 Pedred or Parret a river, 222 a Pedwar, 19 Pedwardins a family, 532 f Peer of Dover, 345 d Pega an holy woman, 515 a Pehiti for Pecti, 118 Peincting that Britans used, 31 Peito a Franciscan Prier, 562 b Peitoes a family, ibid. b Peitons of Peiton hall, knights, 491 a Pelagius an Arch-Heretick, 602 f a Britan born, 87 Pelagian heresie in Britaine, 410 c Pelham, 315 c Pembridges a family, 594 a Pempedula, 19 Pen, by Wicomb, 393 e Penne, 18. what it signifieth, 393 e Pencoh Cloud, 19 Pendle, 19. hil, 749 e Penguall, what it signifieth, 117 Pennigent, 19. hill, 749 c Pen a village, 221 d Penninus, 18 Pentachie of the Romans in Britain, 156 Penuahel, what it signifieth, 117 Pen-Elin, 187 Pensans, 188 Pennant, 191 Penal, 661 c Penbroch or Pembrok-shire, 651 Penbroch towne, 651 c Penbroch Earles, 555 a Pen Maur, 19 Pen Maen Maur, 669 c Pen Maen Bichan, ibid. Penball Crag, 811 d Pendragon Castle, 760 c Penk, a river 582 f Penkridge, a towne, 583 a Penrith, 776 d Pensneth chace, 581 d Penshurst, 329 e Penworth or Penverdant, 752 d Pentaphyllon, 19 Penteney Abbey, 481 Peperking, alias Peverell, 443 f Percies a family, 312 b Perci aies a family, 722 d Percy Hotspur, 803 c Percy Earle of Northumberland slaine by rebels, 724 d Percepierre, an herbe, 237 a Peregrine Berty, Lord Wil∣loughbie of Eresby, 541 f Peregrines, Falkons, 654 b Perennius a Minion of the Em∣perour Commodus, 67. be∣headed. 67 Perin, 190 Perith or Petrianae, 777 a Perles shell fish, 669 d Perles, 765 e Perkin Warbeck, 205 b Pershor, 578 b Pertinax, Emperour, 68 Peter in Britain, ibid. Peters Post a delfe or quary of stone, 696 c Petre of Writle Baron, 442 d Saint Peters upon the Wall, 443 e Sir William Petre his commen∣dations, 446 a Peter pence, 226 c Peterburgh, 512 a Peterril, a river, ibid. Petor, 19 Petoritum, ibid. Petrarie, 400 d Petrock, 194 Petronius Turpilianus sent as Propretor into Britain, 52 Pevensey or Pemsey, 213 e Peverells Lords of Darby, 558 d Peverells a family, 445 c Pever a river and place, 609 e Pewter vessel, 184 Phelips or Philips a family, 467 Philibert, 269 c Philip Earle of Flaenders, Earle of Kent, 352 Pickering a towne, 781 b Pickering Lith, Pickering a Li∣berty and forest, 722 b Picot Sheriffe of Cambridge∣shire, 485 e Picts wall, 789 Picts what it signifieth in old British, 116 Pic, 20 Picts whence descended, the progeny of ancient naturall Britains, 115. why so called, when the Northern Britans, became so called, 116. divided into two nations, 114 Picts, what become of them, 118 Piddle a riveret, 213 d Piers Gaveston, 198 Pierpount a family, 548 f Pigots, 401 c Pilchards, 186 Pilgrimage to our Lady of Wal∣singham, 479 c Pimble mere, 666 b Pimthecnos, 15 Pinkneys Barons, 505 e Pinson a Noble Norman, 541 d Pits, 334 e. 440 Pitchford a village and family, 592 b Placence, 327 b Plague in Yarmouth, 477 f Plaines of Salisbury, 245 d Planarat, 20 Plautius a governour in Britain, 447 Pleshi Plaisi, or Estre, 445 a Plime river, 200 a Plimouth, ibid. a Plimpton, 201 b Plin Limon an high hill, 658 b Plin Lin mere, 666 b Plugenet a Baron, 618 a Plumpton Parke, 776 f Poenius Posthumius killeth him∣selfe, 52 Poinings Barons, 215 d Pointz Barons, 223 f Points a family, 364 b Poleland, why so called, 27 Iohn de la Pole Earle of Lincoln 469 f. executed, 470. b Pollesworth, 569 e Wil. de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, 469 d. banished, 469 f. be∣headed, ibid. Henry Pole Lord Mountacute, 222 d. 453 d Pole, Cardinall, 206 a Poltimore, 203 c Poltrosse a river, 799 f Pole, 192 Policletus a favorite of Nero sent into Britain, 52 Pontes, 394 a Poole, 606 f. Pontthiue County or Earldome in France how it came to the Kings of England, 394 b Poole a towne why so called, 211 e Pomeries, 202 a Pomponius Laetus his opinion of the name of Britain, 5 Pooles on hill tops, 667 e Popham, 223 e. 256 c Pontfret or Pomfret, 695 c. in∣famous for the bloudshed of Princes, 695 f Pont a river, 809 d Port Gate, 808 f Port a Saxon, 210 d Portland, 210 e Portchester, 268 a Port Peris, ibid▪ Portsey Iland, 268 a Ports mouth, 268 b Portstaw, 313 d Potheridge, 208 a Potton, 401 c Portcleis, 603 d Portmen, 477 e Portogan, 603 d Port sholme, 498 a Portskeveth, 633 f Pouderbach Castle, 592 c Poultney a family, 517 Povers a family, 377 a Powder treason of Rob. Catesby, 431 Powick a Baronie, 577 b Powis Lords, 663 c Princes of Powis, 663 Powise Land, 659 c Powlet Lord S. Iohn Earle of Wiltshire, 257 a Powlet his honorable titles, 267 Powderham, 206 b Powndbury, 212 c De Praeriis a family, 607 e Prasutagus King of the Iceni, 49 457 a Praefecti Praetorio under Con∣stantine the Great, 76 Prefecture what it is, 422 Prerogative Court, 181 Presidium, 563 a Priests forbidden marriage, 201 Priests married, 576.201 b Priscus Licinius Propretor in Britaine, 66 Priscillianists the first heretickes condemned to death, 82 Priests marriage debated of in a Synode, 243 d Prestom, 623 e Prichards, a family, 628 e Probus Emperour, 71 Preston in Andernesse, 752 d.e Prideaux, 194 Protolitia, 808 d Prittlewel, 441 c Provinciall Latin affected by the Britans, 116 Provinces 2. in England, 160 Prowes, 203 a Princes of Wales, 683 The Prince, his place, and stile, 163.164 Prudhow Castle, 808 d Pseudocomites, 167 Puckerich, 408 a Puclechurch, 364 a Pudsey Bishop of Durrham and Earle of Northumberland, 741 f Pulein a professour in Divinity and favourer of learning, 379 e. 380 c Pulhealy, 668 b Purbeck Isle, 211 e Purcells, or de Porcellis, 377 a Puseies, 280 f Putney, 303 a Pymp, 19 Pyramides of Glastenbury, 229 Pyramidall stones, 701 a Pyran, 193 Pyrry, a drinke, 573 d Q QUatremans men of good note, 383 f Qeene Borough, 334 a Queenes Colledge in Oxford 381 d Querendon, 395 e Quicke-sands in Holland, 529 f Quincy Saer Earle of Winche∣ster, 267 b Quintinus, 82 Quintins a family, 731 a R RAby Castle, 737 b Raculph Minster, 335 b Radcliffes a family, 767 d Radcliffe or Redcliffe, 437 d Radcliffe in Bristow, 237 e Radegund, 349 a Radmilds, 312 Radnorshire, 623 Radnor town, 623 c Radnore made a shire, 677 e Radwinter, 446 a Ragland, 636 c Raihader Gowy, 623 a. b Raleghs, 208 e Ralegh a town, 443 a Ramsey Isle and Abbey, 499 b Ramsey mere, 499 d Rammes foreheads, that is, Pro∣montories, 184 Ramesbury, 256 b Rank-riders, 799 c Ranulph Earle of Chester, 607 b Rapes in Sussex, 306 e Ratis, 20 Ratcliffs Earles of Sussex, 321 a Ravenglasse, 765 Ravensburne river, 326 Ravenswath castle, 730 b Reads a family, 577 b Reading, 284 Readsquire a mountaine, 802 a Reafan the Danes Baner, 195 Reche a towne, 490 c Recall a river, 722 d Rech dike, ib. Reculver, 335 b Redcastle, or Castle Rous, 594 d Redin, 20 Redhorse vale, 561 c Red colour giveth name to many places, 525 d Redbourne, 413 d Redbridge, 262 d Red rose and white, for Lanca∣ster and Yorke, 725 e Redshankes, 126 Redvers or Rivers Earles of Denshire, 207 d Redverses or de Ripariis, 201 c Redwald King of the East Sax∣ons, 465 c Reforming errours a Court, 180 Reginald Pole his commendati∣on, 216 b Religious houses dissolved, 163 Remney ariver, 631 b. 642 a Remni what it signifieth, 642 a Remigius Bishop of Dorchester, 539 c Rendlesham, 465 c Renimed, 419 e Reptacester or Richborow, 341 a Repton, 553 f Requests Court, 181 Rerecrosse, 732 f Reuda, 126 Rheda, 18 Rheder, ibid. Rhedec, ibid. Rhedecfa, ibid. Rhead a river, 802 a Rheadsdale, ibid. c Rhediad, 18 Rhegium, why so called, 347 d Rhese ap Gruffin, 623 a Rhese ap Thomas a valiant knight, 650 e Rhie a river, 722 d Rhidale, ibid. Rhia, Baron, 472 Rhre whereof so called, 319 d Rhodanus, 21 Rutupina littora what they bee, 342 Ribel a river, 749 d Ribelchester, 750 b Ribald L'isle, 485 f Ricall, 707 d Richard the Second renounceth the crowne, 680 d Richard Duke of Yorke claimeth the crowne, 725 b Richard a renowned Earle of Cornwal, 197 d. his death and sepulchre, his sonne Henry murdred, 197 f Richard Coeur de Lion, 380 a Richard the Third, a bad man and a good Prince, 212 a Richard, Duke of Glocester an usurper, 369 f. his practises to win the crowne, 370 Richard the First his praises, 285 Richard the Second his Reliques translated to Westminster, 414 f Richard King of Romans, &c. 414 Richborow, 341 a Richborow decayed, ibid f Riches Barons, 441 d Richard Lord Chancellour of England, 445 Richards Castle, 619 e Richmond shire, 727 Richmond towne, 729 f Richmond Earles, 733 Richmond the Kings house, 297 Richmonds a family, 778 a Rickmansworth, 415 c Rising Castle, 481 c Risingham, 803 d Rith what it signifieth, 486 a Rivers had Divine honours, 602 heaped upon them, 698 a Robert bridge, 320 c Robert Earle of Leicester, 466 c Robert Crouchbacke Earle of Leicester, 519 f Robert Consul or Earle of Glo∣cester, 368 d Robert Fitz Haimon, 359 d Robin Hood, 693 a Robin Hoods bay, 718 c Roch, a river, 745 f Roch Dale a towne, ibid. Rochester a castle, 802 c Rochester city, 332 c Rochester or Roffes a family, 405 d Rochford towne, and Hundred, Rochford Barons, ibid. Rochford Vicount, ibid. Rockingham Castle and Forest, 513 Rock-Savage, 610 a Roden a river, 594 c Roding a river, 440 b Roger the magnificent Bishop of Salisbury, 243 a Rogerses Knight, 215. ibid. Roise a Lady, 405 b Roiston, ibid. Roises Crosse, ibid. Rolrich stones, 374 c Rollo the Norman, 144 his dream and conversion, 144 The Roll of Winchester, 153 Rome called Constantina, 85 Romania, 24 Romeswork, 343 f Romans foiled and massacred in Britaine, 51 Roman Empire in Britaine at an end, 87 Romans in Britaine, 34 Romescot, 411 a Romara a Norman, Earle of Lincoln, 544 e Roos Barons, 532 f Rosamund Clifford King Henry the Second his paramor, 375 Rosamunds bones translated, and afterwards reduced againe, 376 c Rose red and white for Lancaster, and York, 725 e Rosse, 190.714 a Rosseland, 190 Rosse in Penbrochshire, 652 d Rosse in Cardiganshire, 657 c Rosse Barons, 714 a Rosebery Topping, 721 d Rose Castle, 778 c Rota temporum, that is, The wheele of Times, an History, 790 b Rother a river, 320 a Rotherfield, ibid. Rotherham, 689 e Rotherham Archbishop of Can∣terbury, 689 e Rowcliff Castle, 781 c Rouchester, 809 e Round table, 265 b Rowles in London, 428 c Rousses a family, 467 c Routon Castle, 592 e. 662 Rugby, 562 Rudheath Sanctuary, 609 a Ruffes, fishes, 476 c Rugemond or Richmont Greies in Bedfordshire, 734 d Rugemont, 204 c Rumalds shrine, 396 d Rumford, 441 f Rumon, 199 e Rumney Marsh, 350 b Rumney towne, ibid. Runkhorne, 510 d Rushbrooke, 461 d Rushton, 509 f Russel Lord Russel of Thornaugh 514 c Russels, Knights, 578 e Russels Earles of Bedford, 394 e 403 Ruthin, 676. Ruthlan, 679 f Rutlandshire, 525. why so called, 525 b, c, d Rutland Earles, 426 f Rutters what they were, 812 b S SAbridgeworth, 408 c Sacae 129. Sacasones, ibid. Sadlier, 408 a Sacvil Earle of Dorset and Chancellour of Oxford, 382 Saer de Quincy Earle of Win∣chester, 521 a Salisbury Church, 248 a, b Saffron, 453 a Salisbury Earles, 249 c Salarin a custome or Impost for salt, 608 a Salisbury for Sarisbury, 246 f Salisbury Hall, 750 c Salkelds townes, 777 e. and a fa∣mily, 778 a Salmons the best called Umbrae, 627 Salmon leape in Penbrochshire, 6 4 e Salndie or Sandie, 401 b Salston, 48 e Salt made, 268 b, e Salt Esse, 196 Salt hilles, 529 e Salt artificially made, 753 b Salt stones, 739 d Saltpits, 573 b, c Saltry Abbey, 500 b Salt pits in Cheshire, 608 a, b Salustius Lucullus in Britaine, 62 Saltwood Castle, 349 c Salwarp a river, 574 d Salmonds or S. Amands, 283 c Samonds or S. Amands Barons, 244 a. 366 e Samothea, 24 Sampier growing aboundantly, 434 a Sandal Castle, 693 d The Sand, part of Notingham∣shire, 550 a Sandalum, 19 Sandgate Castle, 349 e Sandiacre or S. Diacre, 555 d Sands Barons, 269 b, & e Sandon, 343 a Sandy, See Saludica. Sanctuaries, 260 Sandwich, 342 Sanguelac, 317 e Sapcots a family, 501 e Sarasins-heads, 695 a Sarmatians are Scythians, 121 Sarn Helen a Portway in Wales, 666 a Sasson, 23 Saxon language maintained by Lectures, 200 a English-Saxons called into Bri∣tain, 100.127 Saxons, 119. their valour and cruelty, 134 Saturn well affected to Britaine, 556 e Savages a great family, 610 a Saulden, 396 c Scarborough Castle, 717 Scardale, 556 a Schilpor, See Esquires, 176 Scaeva his valour and advance∣ment, 37 Scalbie Castle, 782 e Scilicester in the wall, 806 b Scipio Africanus, where buried, 340 a Sclate-stones digged, 514 d Scorby or Scurvie-grasse, 328 b Scordium an herbe growing plen∣teously, 491 f Scoteney a Barony, 542 c Scottishmen of East-Scotland, right English-Saxons, 129 their fashions, 133 Scots wild or Highlandmens ha∣bit sort well with the Gothes, 123 Scots whence they tooke name, 119 Scots of West Scotland are High∣land men, ibid. Scots came first out of Ireland, 120 Scots when they came to be of name, 125 Scot what it signifieth, 124 Scots a family, 349 Scotus, aliâs, Duns, 814 b his pitifull death, ibid. Scovies, 20 Screking ham, 535 c Screven a place and family, 700 Scroby, 551 b Scropes Barons, 729 b Scruffel hill, 767 e Scudamores a family, 621 a Sculton, 473 a Scutary, 176 Scythica vallis, 120 Scythians in Spaine, 121 Scythicum a promentory in Spain, 121 Seaton, 206 e Sea Holly, See Eryngium. Sea heard to grone, 720 c Sea sand good for ground, 199 c Sea is warme, 2 Sea coles, 735 c. 799 d Sea men caught, 466.720 b Seales how they sleepe and are caught, 720 c Seaven mile dike, 490 b Seavenshale, 801 f Seckinton, 569 e Sefton, 748 d Seghil, ibid. Segonax, 37 Segrave a towne, 523 b. a fami∣ly, ibid. Segraves Barons, 568 c Stephen Segrave his rising and fall, 501 c, d Iane Seimor mother to King Edward the sixth, 224 Seimors or Saint Maurs Earles of Hertford, 416 Seimor Duke of Somerset, 240 b Seimor or Saint Maur Earle of Hertford, 634 d Seneca a great Usurer in Britain, 457 c Sejont a river, 668 d Selwood, 233 a Selwhat it signifieth, 271 c Selbeies a family, 812 f Selbrittenden, 351 c Selaby, 737 c Selbury, 255 a Semarc or de S. Medardo a fa∣mily, 714 d Sempringham, 534 d Serjeanties, 213 Seovenburgenses, 829 c Seton, 811 f Sevenoke, 328 d Sevenoke Alderman of London his Hospitall and Schoole, 328 d Severn river, his head, 661 c commended, 357 d a noble river, 573 d Severus Propretor in Britaine, 65 Severus Emperour, his exploits, 67. hee entreth Britaine, 69. fenseth Britaine with a wall, 69. died at Yorke, 70.703 b his funerals, ibid. canonized a god, 70 Seward a Poet, 632 d Sexwulph first Abbot of Peter∣burgh Abbey, 512 c Sezay, 724 e Shafts, 184 Shaftsbury, 214 d Sharnborne, 480 c Shavington, 607 e Scheaths, 609 d Sheafield, 689 c Shene, 297 c Sheep devour men, &c. 505 c Sheffelds Barons, 544 d Shengay a Commaundery, 485 e Shelford a Barony, 472 e Shepey Isle, 333 c Ship of King Hiero, 32 Shipston, 561 c Shirburne a brooke running through Shirbourne, 696 b a towne and Castle, 214 a. A Bishops See, 214 b Shirley a place, and family, 313 c 553 d. 505 e Shires divided into Hundreds, 158 Shirewood forest, 547 b Shires how many in England, 159 Shoad, 184 Shobery, 441 c Shorne, 329 b Shobery Nesse, ibid. Shochlach, 604 b Shoreham, 313 b Shotwich Castle, 606 e Shrawerden Castle, 597 b Shrewsbury, 595 a Shrewsbury Earles, 599 b Shropshire, 589 Shugbury a towne and family, 561 d Shurland, 334 a Sible Hemingham, 450 b. See Heningham or Heveningham, Sicily the Isle cut from Italy, 346 d whence it tooke name, 273 d Sidlie a learned knight, 332 b Sider a drinke, 20 Sidius Geta his good service in Britain, 41 Sidmanton, 272 c Sidnacester, 543 f Sidneys, 329 e Sir Robert Sidney Baron of Pens∣herets and Vicount Lisle, 329 e 280 f Sigebert a tyrant, 272 e Sigga a noble woman, 806 b Silcester, or Selcester, 270 a Silt, 9 d Simon Zelotes in Britain, 68 Sinbrech or Simon Brech, 126 Sinodun, 281 b Sion, 420 e Sisters kirks, 714 b Siwards a family, 646 e Siward Earle of Huntingdon, 502 c Skales, Barons, 405 e Skeffington a towne and family, 522 e Skelton Castle, 720 c Skiddaw an hill, 767 c Skinffrith Castle, 632 b Skipton in Craven, 694 b Skipwiths a family, 521 b Slebach a Commandery, 652 c Sleford, 535 d Sleepe a towne, 498 f Smiths a family, 607 e Snath, 729 d Snodhil Castle, 617 d Snowden Forest, 667 a Snowdon hils, ibid. Soar, a river, 517 b Sockburne, 737 d Sodales Augustales, 448 b Sodbury, 364 c Soham, 493 a Solway frith, 775 Solente frith, 267 e Soldurii, 20 Solidurii what they are, 99 Solidarii, 171 Solidus, a coyne of Gold, 99 Solyhill, 567 a Solom Mosse, 782 a Someries Barons of Dudley, 397 a noble family, 581 Somerley, 468 e Somersham, 499 a Somersetshire, 220. whence it tooke name, 220 b Somerset Dukes and Earles, 239 c Somerton, 224 f. towne, 220 c Snite a brooke, 549 c Soureby, 724 e Sow a river in Staffordshire, 583 e Southam, 561 d Sowdiur, 20 South-Anton towne, 260 f Southton or Sutton in Hereford∣shire, 620 d Southampton Earles, 272 f Southybank, 530 a South rhey, or Sutherey, why so called, 295 South Saxons kingdome, 321 c South Wales, 659 c Southwels a family, 473 a Southwold, 467 a Spadiards, 185 Spaine rent from Afrike, 346 Spalding, 532 b Spaldwick, 501 d Spelwell by Dantrey, 508 Spensers knights, ibid. Spenser, alias, de Spenser execu∣ted, 269 c. De Spenser Barons, Spenser Lord Spenser, Baron of Wormleighton, 508 De Spenser Baronesse, 330 Hugh Spenser, 642 b Spigurnell what it signifieth, 312 a Spilmans knights, 480 d Spittle on Stanemore, 732 f Spittle in the street, 540 e Sponde his tombe in Torcester-church, 506 b Spring turning stickes & strawes into stones, 518 a Spurnhead, 714 a Saint Ives a towne, 498 f Saint Iohns Barons of Basing, 269 b Sir Oliver Saint Iohn, 239 Saint Iohns Barons of Lagham, 303 e Saint Legiers or Sellengers, 331 Saint Guerir, or Saint Leech, 191 Saint Lizies a family, 498 a Saint Lo or Sentlow, 196 a Saint Georges knights, or of the Garter, 485 d Saint Martins a family, 246 a Saint Maries a towne, 481 b Saint Paul, or Sampol a family, 544 a Saint Stephens in Westminster, 431 a Saint Maurs or Seimors, 224 a Saint Cler, 591 e Simon, Saint Liz or Selis the first Earle of Northampton, 509 Simon de Saint Liz the second, 515 f Saint Iohn his knights, 241 f Saint Swithins feast rainie, 265 d Staffords of Blatherwic knights, 514 b Staffords of Grafton, 395 e Staffords Dukes of Buckingham, 397 e Stafford of Suthwick Earle of Devonshire, 208 Staffords Earles of Wiltshire, 256 c Staffordshire, 581 Stafford towne, 584 d Stafford holdeth Carborough Castle, 717 e Stamford a Citizen of London, 208 Standard, what it was, 724 Standon, 408 a Standrop or Stainthorp, 737 b Stanford upon Avon, 515 b Stanford rivers, 440 Stanford upon Welland, 533 e an Universitie begunne at this Stanford. 533 e Stanford destroied, ibid. Stanes, 419 d Stanes forest or waren, 421 c Stanely the Expensfull Bishop of Ely, 499 a Stanlaw, 606 f Stanleies a noble family, 583 f Stanleies whence descended, 606 Stanleies Earles of Darby, 749 f Stanemore, 732 e Stannaries, and their Lord War∣den, 185 Stanhopes, 549 a Stantons a family, 553 d Stanwel, 419 c Stanwicks, 782 e Star Chamber, 179 Stations or Mansions in Anto∣nine, 399 f Steanford, 547 c Steort, 187 Stert point, 201 d Stewes, 434 d Stephanides, See Fitz Stephen, Steven Hauh a towne, 406 e Stibium found in Darbyshire, 556 f Stiliard, 435 c Stilton or Stichilton, 501 f Stilicho protector to Honorius in his minority, 73 Stipper stones hill, 592 c Stoke battell, there fought, 549 a Stonar, what place, 339 f Stoke Curry, 221 a Stoke Pogeys, 394 c. 521 c Stockepont a pety Barony, 610 Stoke Fleming, 202 Stokesley, 521 a Stone a towne: why so called, 783 Stones made by art, 253 a. b Stoneheng, 251 Stoneham, 262 d Stonely Abbey in Huntingdon∣shire, 501 c Stoneley, 562 e Stonely Holme, ibid. Stony serpents of S. Hilda, 718 e Stones with stony serpents in them, 721 a Stonie street, 349 Stones resembling Cochles &c. 363 e Stony stroud, 21 Stoners a family, 389 a Store a river, 408 c Bishop Stortford, ibid. Stow on the would, 366 a Stow in Lincolnshire, 543 d Stouphs or Hote houses used much, 681 d Stow in Suffolke, 464 b Stow, 196 Stour river in Suffolke, 462 a Stour river in Dorsetshire, 214 c Stour mere, 462 a Stour a river, 573 f Stour a river in Kent, 335 d called Wantsume and Inlade, 339 e Stourbridge faire, 489 b Stourminster, 215 c Stourton, 245 a Stourton Castle, 581 c Stourton the Honour of the Ba∣rons de Stourton, 214 c Stourtons Barons, 245 b their Crest, 245 b Stradlings or Esterlings a fami∣ly, 641 f Stradling knight, 641.643 e Strange a family of knights de∣gree, 480 b Strange de Blackmere, 365 f 598 f. de Knocking, 597 c Strangbow Conquerour of Ire∣land, 397 d Strat Clud, 676 d Strangwaies a family, 721 b Strangwaies, 212 f The Crosse there, 397 a Stratford upon Avon, 565 a Stony stratford, 396 f Strait of Callais, 345 e Stratfleur, 657 Strath what it signifieth, 117 Stratton, 196 a Stream workes, 184 Strelleys knights, and Sturleys the same, 550 d Strelley Sturley or Strellegh a towne and family, 550 a. b Strensham, 578 c Strettons, 593 a. d Stretlham, 737 a Strighul castle, or Strugle, 633 Strigulia, 633 c Strigulia Earles, ibid. Strickland a place and family, 762 Strongbow first Earle of Pen∣broch, 655 b Strangbow, 633 c Stroud, a river, 362 b Studia the same that Universi∣ties, 379 c. 381 a Sudbroke, 633 f Sudley the Barony of Chandos, 365 b Sudbury, 462 e Suffolke, 459 Suffolke Cheeses, 459 b Suffragans to the Archbishop of Canterbury, 344 d Suerby, 714 b. c Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury, 337 b Sully an Iland & name of a man, 642. f Sueno King of Danes subdueth Ethelbert and England, 143 Sunning a Bishops See, 286. a Superstition of the Britans, Surrey Earles, 304 a Suria the goddesse, 801 e Sur-teis, Gentlemen, 737 Susana in Spaine, 12 Sussex, 306 Sussex Earles, 320 e. f Suit in law betweene Edward Nevill and Dame Mary Fane determined in Parliament, 636 Sutton Colfeld, 567 b Suthwicke, See Earle of Devon∣shire, 208 b Suthwell, 549 b Sutton Vautort, 200 a Sutton Prior, ibid. a Suttons a family, 581 c Suttons Gentlemen of worth in Notinghamshire, 549. e Sutton in Darbyshire, 556 b Swaffham, 481 f Swallow hole, 297 a Swale river, 729 e Swaldale, ibid. f Swale the river used for Bap∣tisme, 136 Swanscomb, 329 a Suene Tiugs Kege a Danish Ty∣rant, 543 e Swerds delfe, 501 a English Swet whereof it came, 24.596 Suetonius Paulinus Propretor in Britain, 49. His oration and battell with Queene Boadi∣cia, 51 Swidelme King of the East An∣gles, 465 c Swines pennies, 550 Swift river, 517 d Swinborne a place and family, 806 b Swinsey or Sinsey, 646 b Synodes, 181 Syriack tongue mother of all lan∣guages, 204 b T TAbbes for S. Ebbes, 743 b Tadcaster, 699 a Taff. a river, 650 c. 642 c Taisborrough, 473 b Talbois Barons, 535 e Talbots Earles of Shrewsbury, 598 f Talbot Vicount Lisle slaine by the Lord Barkley, 364 c Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, a worthy warriour, his Epitaph, 598 d. his stile and honours, 599 c Talbot skilfull in Antiquities, 182 Talcharn Castle, 650 c Talmachs, a family, 463 e Tame river, 383 e Tame towne, ibid. Tame and Isis meet, 384 e Their marriage poetically descri∣bed. 384 f Tamis or Thames the river, 241 281 Tamis why so called, 384 e Tamis how farre he ebbeth and floweth, 298 d Tamis mouths, 333 f Tamis mouth, 441 d Tamar river, 196 b. 197 a Tamerton, 196 b Tame a river, 581 f Tamworth, 582 a Tanet a river in Wales, 662 e Tanet or Tenet Isle, 335 d Tanet Isle why called Thanatos, 339 f Tanet inhabitants industrous, 340 d Tanfeld, 729 d Tania what it signifieth, 27 Taran, 17 Taranis, ibid. Tarian, 18 Tascia what it signifieth, 97 Task what it is, 409 c Tatershall a Barony, 541 d Tathai a British Saint, 633 Tatsalls a family, 472 c Tavistoke Abbey, 199 e Taw river, 208 b Tawstock, ibid. Tawton, ibid. Taxea, 20 Taximagulus, 37 Teave river, 199 e Tees or Teis a river head, 736 Tees mouth or Teis mouth, 721 b Teg what colour, 26 Teg-Engle, 680 c Teigne river, 203 a Tein a brook, 587 d Teis or Tees river, 718 c Telean, 642 d Telen, 21 Temesford, 401 b Temd, a river, 589 e The Temple at Bristow, 238 a Temple, 396 e Temple Bruer a Commandery, 535 f Templars, 427 d Tenby, 651 b Tenham, 334 d Terminations of places names, 20 Terne a river, 593 b Terringham a towne and family, 397 c Test a river, 260 e Tetnal, or Theotenhal, 581 e Tetrachie erected by Aelfred in his Monarchie, 160 Teverton or Swifordton, 203 a Teutates, 17 Tew, 20 Tewksbury, 359 c Thanes, 168 Thaxted, 444 e Thessey a river, 565 Thellesford, ibid. Thelwall, 610 c. why so called, ib. Theobalds a stately house, 408 d Theocus an Eremite, 359 c Theodosius an expert warriour sent into Britaine, 79. his ex∣ploits there, 80. he recovereth the Roman province there, 80 honoured for his service. 81 Theodosius his sonne Emperour, 81. he triumpheth over Maxi∣mus the usurper, 83 Theon the last British Bishop of London, 425 b Theophilus Antrochenus, 9 Thet a brooke, 471 d Thetford, 471 d. a Bishops See, ibid. f Thin studious of Antiquities, 160 Thins a family, 245 a Thireos, 18 Thirlwal Castle, 799 f Thirlwal a familie first called Wades, 800 Thirlwall, why so called, ibid. Thirty tyrants or usurpers at once, 71 Thirstleworth, 420 e Thonderdach, 17 Thone river, 223 b Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester smoothred at Calais, 369 d Thoneton or Taunton, 223 Thongcaster, 542 d Thor, a god, how pourtraied, 135 Thoresby, 774 c Thornaugh, 514 Thornbury, 363 f Thorndon, 442 e Thorney Abbey, 494 d Thornhils. 693 d Thornton, 396 e Thornton in Lincolnshire, 542 f Thorps a family, 472 d Thorpston, alias Thrapston, 510 Thredling See Deben, Thresk castle, 724 c Throcknortons a family, 565 e Throgoy a river, 634 c Thurgarton, 549 a Thurkil, 326 e Thurland Tunstalls, 753 e Thwengs a family, 721 e Thwengs, 196 a Thyrn, a river, 478 b Tibba a shee Saint and patronesse of Falcony, 526 d Tiberius Caesar medled not with Britain, 4 Tibetofts or Tiptofts Earles of Worcester, 549 c Tibury or Titusbury hil. 262 a Tichburne, 262 f Tickhil, 690 Ticks hal, 584 e Tideswell, 558 c Tikenhal by Beaudly, 573 f Till a river, 815 b Tilbury, 440 d Tilliots a family, 782 Tilney a towne, 481 b Tilneys a family, 472 d Tilneys Knights, 481 b Tilneys smeth, ibid. Tiltey Abbey, 444. e Timbod castle, 624 a Times of the world, 334 Timothie an heriticke in Britan, 87 Tin in Cornwall, 184 Tin of two sorts, 185 Tinworkers common wealth, 185 Tindagel, 194 Tindale, 802 a Tine, 799 e Tine, 802 a Tinmouth, 811 Tio, vel, Finga-Cester, 549 b Tippall, a river, 800 b Tirells a family, 396 e Tithings or Decimes ordained, 158 Titus his warlike service in Bri∣taine, 42 Titus the worlds joy dieth, 56 Tivie the river, 949 b. where he springeth, 657 c Todenay, or Tony, 536 b Todenay or Tony, 414 b Todington, 365 c Tong castle, 594 a Tonsure or shaving the Crowne, 118 Topcliff, 731 a Torbay, 202 d Torcester, 505 f Torksey, 538 a Torneaments, 407 d Tosto vanquished, 145 Totnes, 201 e Totnesse shore, 202 Touchets a family, 584 b. Ba∣rons de Audeley, ibid. Tovie the Kings Standard bea∣rer, 439 d Tovie, the river, 649 d Toure d' Ordre, 345 c Tower of London, 423 e Towridge river, 207 f Tourington, 208 b Towton battell, 696 d Trabucks, 400 Tracies, 36 d Traiford a place and family, 747 Traith Maur, 666 a Traith Bichan, ibid. Traith Taff, 642 c Trebellius Max. Propretor in Britaine, 52 Treboeth, 605 f Trederman, 783 b Tr es under ground, 745 d. 607 Tregaron, 657 d Tregonie, 190 Tregian, ibid. Tregoz Barons, 617 d Trelawnies, 192 Trematon, 193 Trenewith, 661 e Trent a riveret, 213 Trent a river. 547 Treutham a Monastery, 583 Treshams a family, 509 c Trevilions, 196 b Triadum, a British booke, 33 Tribet, 29 Tribunals or Courts of Iustice in England, 177 Tribunitian auctority, 101 Trihine what it was, 159 Trimarcia, 18 Tripetia, 20 Trophee in Cornwall, 188 Trubridge, 244 e True-place, 802 a Trusbut, 540 e Tuddington, 401 f Tufa a Banner, 195 Tuisco the Saxons stock-father, 135 Tuisday, ibid. Tunbridge why so called, 330 a Tunstall a worthy Prelate, 744 d Turbervelis, or de Turbida villa, 213 e Turbevils a family, 643 e Turkil a Coward, 464 e Turkils of Arden, 565 d Turkil the Dane, 500 b Tirold Abbot of Peterborough, 513 a Turton Chappell and tower, 745 Turpins Knights, 517 Turets a family, 594 e Turvy, 399 b Tuscets or Touchets Barons Au∣deley, 609 a Tutbury Castle, 587 f Twede the river, 814 e Twifford, 813 c Twinamburue, 259 c Tyrants in Britain, 23 Tzetzes a fabulous Greeke wri∣ter, 32 V VAle a river, 189 Vale, 393 b Vale of Ailesbury, 395 c Vale Roiall, 608 d Vallachians why so called, 11 Valle Crucis, 677 a Valect what hee is, 663. a wor∣shipfull title, 713 c Valoinois a family, 465 f Valtorts, 193 Valvasores, 168 Vandals and Burgundians in Britaine, 114 Vandals brought into Britaine by Probus, 71 Vandelberia, 489 d Vargae, 19 Varia what it signifieth, 679 c Vaulx Barons, 786 b. 510 Ubbanford, 816 b Uchel, 21.190 Vectius Bolanus, 53 Venables Barons of Kindreton, 609 b Vandraeth Vehan, a river, 649 Venedocia, 659 f Venutius a Potentate of Britain. 48 Venutius warreth upon his wife Cartismandua, 53 Verannius Propretor in Britaine, 49 Verbeia, the river Wherfe, and a Goddesse. 697 Veres Earles of Oxford, 389 d Vere the good Earle, 390 b Vere Earle of Oxford became a Monke, 450 d Vere, 202 f Vere Earle of Oxford and Mar∣quesse of Dublin, Verdons a family, 517 f. 620 b Veriad, 19 Vernaies Knights, 565 a Vernons a family, 567 a Verulam or Verlam Citie in old time, 408 f Vesey, Barons, 722 c. neere to Saint Albons, Verulam Tribute, 409 c Vespasian his acts in Britaine, 41 42 Uffa, 458 a Ufkins, ibid. Ufford a towne, 465 c Valentinian an Arrian, 83 Valentine a rebell in Britaine suppressed, 80 Ufford Earle of Suffolke, 465 c Uffords, 813 b Vicarius or Vicegerent in Britan, 76 Vicounts, what title of Honour, 167 Vicount of Honour who was first in England, 521 e Victor the sonne of Maximus slaine, 83 Victorina, 271 b Victorinus a commendable go∣vernour under Honorius in Britaine. 85 Victorie what names it hath in divers languages. 457 e Vecturiones who so called. 117 Vellocatus Costrell to Venutius marieth his wife, 53 Victrix, a Legion, 604 c Vies, 244 a Villa forinseca what it is, 391 e Villiers a family, 523 a Vineyards in Britaine, 71 The Vine, 269 d Vines in England, ibid. e Vinyards in Glocestershire, 357 f Vincents Rocke, 239 a Virius Lupus Propretor, 69 Virgins eleven thousand Mar∣tyrs, 197 a. 286 c Visigothi, 294 c Visi Saxones, ibid. Viscounts a family, Vitsan, 347 d Vitrum, 19 Viterinus, 691 d Ulpius Marcellus a brave warri∣our, 66. his vigilancy and temperance, ibid. Ulphus his horne, 704 e Ulse a lake, 776 c Ulstley, 773 a Ulysses whether ever in Britaine, 32 Ulyssippo, that is, Lisbon whence it tooke name, 32 Ulverston, 755 c Umfranvils a family, 806 b. 535 University Colledge in Oxford, 381 c University, a publicke schoole, 381 b Unstrote a river, 138 Voisy Bishop of Excester, 567 Vortigern the last Monarch of British blood, and the bane of his country, 624 b. burnt with Lightning, ibid. Vortigerne alias Gourtigern sen∣deth for Saxons, 128 Vortimer a valiant Britaine where buried, 538 e Uppingham, 525 e Upton, 577 Vortiporius a Tyrant of the Di∣metae, 113 Ursula, an holy Virgin, 197 Ursus de Abtot, 570. Sheriffe of Worcestershire, 578 e Usa, or Isa, that is, Ouse a river, 296 Usipians their venturous and me∣morable fact, 57 Uske a river, 628 a Uske a towne, 636 c Utcester, 587 e Uther Pendragon, 195. why so called, 410 Uxbridge, 419 W WAda a Saxon Duke, 719 b Wadensbourg, 241 d Wadham, 382 a Wahul, Woodhil, or Odill, 399 c Barons de Wahul, ibid. Wakes Barons Wake and Estote∣vill, 202 d. 407, 533 a Wakes of Blisworth, 533 b Wakefield, 693 d Wakeman of Rippon, 700 d Wainfleete in Lincolne-shire, 542 b Wales, 615 c, d. 22. annexed and united to the Crowne of Eng∣land, 114 Walch, 22 Walcher Bishop of Durham slain in a Commotion, 743 d Wall by Lichfield, 582 e Wall of Turfe betweene E∣denburgh Frith and Cluid, 86 Walls end, 811 b Wall of stone built in Britaine, 86 Wallbery, 453 d Walbrooke in London, 423 a Walbeofs a family, 628 e Walden, 452 b Walde of Earle of Northampton and of Huntingdon, 502 c 515 c. his disloyall treachery, ibid. Walleran Earle of Mellent, and first Earle of Worcester, 579 a Wallers, 330 e Wallerond, 618 a Walfleot Oisters, 444 d Walli, Wallon, 22.113 Wallingford, 281 d Wallop or Welhope, a place, 262 Wallops a family, ibid. b Wallot Isle, 443 c Walmesford bridge, 511 d Walnut-tree at Glastenburie, 227 Walney an Island, 755 c Walpole, 481 b Walshal, 581 f Walsh, a family, 364 Walsh, what it signifieth, 113 Walsingham, 470 c Walsingham a towne, 479 c Walsingham Knights, ibid. Walter de Hemingford, 721 Walter, 752 f Walter Espec, 709 d Waltham Crosse, 437 d Waltham Forest, 439 c Waltham Abbey or Waltham Crosse a towne, 439 c Walton in Darbyshire, 556 b Walton a place and familie, 572 Walwick, 802 a Walwort a herbe called Danes-blood, 452 b Wandlesworth, 303 a Wandle a river, 287 f Wansdike, 241 d Wantage, 281 a Wantsum, or Wentfar a riveret, 473 c. see stour in kent Ware a towne, 407 c Wapentakes, what they bee, 159 Ware a Priest and Baron of the Parliament, 746 a Wests, Barons de la Ware, 312 Warburgton a place, and familie, 610 b Wards, 179 Wardens of the Marches, 799 b Warden of the Cinque ports, 325 b Wardon, 401 c Wardon Hundred in Northamp∣tonshire, 507 b Wardour a Castle, 246 a Ward-staff. 440 c Warham towne, 213 c Warkworth, 813 a Warington, 748 b Warnford, 269 a Warre civill betweene Yorke and Lancaster determined in the death of Edward the young Earle of Warwicke, 570 Warwast, 201 c Warwick-shire, 561 Warwick towne, 562 f Warwick Earles, 569 f Warwicke in Cumberland, 778 a Wash a river, or Guash, 525 e Washes a dangerous arme of the Sea, 480 d Washburnes, villages and fami∣lies, 577 d Wasts, 806 a Waterfall, 730 c Water divided, 399 c Water Germander. See Scor∣dium, Watford, 415 a Watch-tower erected by C. Cali∣gula, 40 Watlesbury, 592 f Watling-street highway, 64 Watling-street a towne, 593 Waveney, a river, 467 d Waver a river, 773 b Wauburn, 479 a Wauburnham, ibid. Weably, 620 b Weably Ale, ibid. Weald in Kent, 329 d Weare a towne, 205 c Weares the Decay of Excester haven, 205 c Weddesborrow, 581 f Wedensday, 135 Weedon in the Street, 508 c Weimouth, 211 b Well ebbing and flowing, 558 c Welles medicinable, 497 d Welch Poole a towne, 662 b Welles Barons, 541 e. 542 b Welles vicount, 542 Welles the City, 223 d Welland river, 505 b Welledon, 514 d Welhop a riveret, 738 c Wellingborow, 509 f Wenlock, 591 e Wemme, 594 c Wenmans, a family, 384 a Went a river, 690 f Wentsbeck a river, 812 b Wentsdale, 727 e Wentworth a place, and familie, 689 e Wentworths Barons, 463 c Weorth what it signifieth, 582 Were a river, 738 Werburga or Warburga an holy virgin, 508 c. 583 Werburgs Church in Chester, 605 Werith, what colour, 26 Werke Castle, 815 a Werlam or Verlam Citie in great distresse, 51 Werlam-street, 64 Werminster, 245 c Werywall, 754 d Wests Barons de la Ware, 312 d 746 b Westminster, sometime Thorney, 428 e Westminster Church, 428 f Monuments therein, 429 f Westminster hall, 431 e Westmorland, 759 Westmorland Earles, 763 d Westriding, 489 d West Saxons bring the Heptar∣chie to a Monarchie, 138 West sexenlage, 153. 159 West Saxons kingdome, 294 c West wales, 647 b West weales, 184 Wetherby, 699 a Wetherill, 778 a Wever a river, 601 e Wever an hill, 586 f Wey river, 294 e Whaddon, 396 d Wiatts a family, 331 e Wiat his unfortunate end, ibid. e Wic what it signifieth, 326.355 Wiceii, 354 f. 573 d Wiches, that is, Salt pits, 573 b Wich a towne, 575 b Wich wood forest, 374 b Wich a learned Canonist, 575 a Wichliff died, 517 f Wickham Bishop of Winchester, 265 e. his praise, 266 c. d his equivocant mot, 288 d Wicombe, or wickham a towne, 393 d Widdevile or Woodvill a family, 506 c Widdevill Lord Rivers, ibid. d Earle Rivers, ibid. High Con∣stable of England, ibid. &c. be∣headed, ibid. e Widdevill, Earles rivers, 405 e Wie river, 358 e. 618 a A wife demised to another, 312 f Wigenhall, 481 b Wight Isle, 273 c. &c. why so called, ibid. the Lords thereof, 276 c. d Wiggin, 749 c Wigmore, 619 c Wigton, 774 b Wilberhams or Wilburhams a family, 607 d Wilberham, 490 b A wild man caught in the Sea, 466 a Wilfride Bishop, 275 d. 308 c Wilfride Archbishop of Yorke 700 c Wilfreeds Needle, ibid. c Willebrode a learned English∣man, 137 Willey or Willeley, 591 d a river and village, 245 e. 246 Wharton Castle, 701 d Wheallep Castle, 701 d Wheathamsted, 406 e Iohn of Wheathamsted, ibid. f Wherfe the river, 696 d. why so called, ibid. f Whetstons, 339 c Whitehart forest, 213 f whereupon so called, 214 a Whitehart silver, ibid. Whitchurch in Shropshire, 598 Whitgaraburge, 275 c Whitgift Archbishop of Cater∣bury, 542 d. his good deeds, 302 b Whitby, 718 b White Hall the Kings house, 432 Whitham, 446 b Whitehorse vale, 279 c Whitney a place and family, 618 Whitsan, 348 b White spurres, 176 Whittington, 598 b Whorwel, 262 a William of Newborough, 8 William or Wilcock of Mouthwy 665 William of York, 695 c William of Malmesbury, 242 f William Long-Espee, 145, 249 d slaine neere Damiata, 249 e William the Bastard, or Conque∣rour, 145. his title to the crowne, ibid. where he landed, 316 e. invadeth England, 145 he fought with King Harald, ibid. f. sworne to keepe all the ancient lawes of England, 414 c. is inaugurated King, 152 disavoweth his title and Con∣quest, 152. his behaviour pre∣sently upon victorie, 152. his seale, ibid. hee enacteth excel∣lent lawes, 153 His policy to root out and weaken the English, 152 Williams of Tame, 384 a Willibourne a river, 245 d Willimots wicke, 801 e Willoford, 785 c Willoughby frozen to death in a voiage, 555 d Willoughbyes Barons of Brooke, 244 c. 577 b Willoughbies Barons, 465.541 e Willoughby of Parrham, 543 d Willoughby earl of Vandosme, 54r Willoughby knight, 547 c Wilshire, 241 Wilshire Earles, 256 d. e Wilton a towne, 246 c Wilton Castle, 621 a. 721 a Wimundham or windham, 473 d Wimundham in Leicestersh, 522 Wimondly, 406 c Winander mere, 755 b Winburne what it signifieth, 216 a Winburne minster, 215 e Wincaunton, 221 d Winchelcombe towne & Abbay, 365 d Winchelsey, 319 b Winchel. See Ore, Old Winchester, 809 e. 269 a Winchester, 262 Winchester bishops, 265 e Winchester tower in windsor Ca∣stle, 288 d Winchester Earles and Mar∣quesses, 267 b. d Winchindon, 395 f Windesor Barons, 289 a. 320 Windesors a family, 419 c Windesor towne, 286 d. e Windsor Castle, 288 d Windlesor forest, 293 b Windrush river, 374 a Wingfeld in Darbyshire, 555 e Winfeilds Knights, 512 a Winifride a learned Englishman, 137. the Apostle of Germanie, 203. d Winkles or cockles on Hil-tops, 727 c Winster a river, 760 a Winterton a Cape, 478 d Winwidfield, 694 e Winwicke, 748 b Wipped fleet, 340 a Wire a river, 753 a Wire-dale, ibid. Wirkington, 769 Wirral, 601 e. 606 d Wiske a river, 723 e Withburga a Saint, 482 a Witherington or Woderington a castle and name of a martiall familie, 812 e Wittlesmere, 500 d Witton a Castle, 738 c Wiza a riveret, 773 b Wye a towne in Kent, 335 d Woad, 19 Woburn, 401 e Woden, 241 d Woden a Saxons god, 135 Woderington. See Witherington, Wold in Leicestershire, 523. a Wollaton, 547 Woodvil. See Widvil, Wolpher a Pagan King killeth his two sonnes, 583. became a Christian, 512. d Wolsey Cardinal a Butchers son, 469 c Wollover, 815 c Wolstane Bishop of Worcester ca∣nonized a Saint. 576 d Wolvehunts a family, 556 d Wolverton a towne and family, 397 Wolves destroyed, 665 Wondy, 634 c Woodbridge, 465 d Wooden, how pourtraied, 135 Woodhall, 407 Woodham Walters, 446 b Woodland a part of Warwick∣shire, 561 b Woodnoths, 607 e Woodstock, 375 d Wooton Basset, 242 a Woodrising, 473 a Worcestershire, 573 Worcester, 575 c Worcester Earles, 578 f Workensopl, 550 f Workesworth, 556 e World how it began to be peopled, 11 Wormhill, 556 d Wormleighton, 561 d Wormgay or Wrongey, 481 e Worsted a towne, 478 c Worsted stuffe whence so called, 478 c Wortley a place and family, 689 Wotton under Wever, 586 Wottons a familie, and Baron Wotton of Merlay, 331 a Wotton under Edge, 364 c Woulds what they be, 364 Wragby, 540 e Wreke a river, 517 b Wreken a river in Leicester∣shire, 522 c Wreken an hill, 593 d Wreshill castle, 710 a Wrexham, 677 b Wriothesleys or Writhosleies, Earles of Southamton, 273 a Wringcheese, 19 Writtle, a large parish, 445 e Wrotesley or Wrothesley a place and family, 581 d Wroxcester, 593 b Wroxhall, 566 d Wulfrune a devout woman, 581 Wulfrunes Hampton or Wulver Hampton, 581 e Wulpet, 463 f Wyre forest, 573 e X X. No British letter, 97 Y YAle, 676 e Yanesbury castle, 245 e Yardley Hasting, 509 e Yare, 721, a. a river, 468 d Yarmouth, 476 f Yeomen, 177 Yeverin, 815 d Y-kil what it signifieth, 714 a Yorkes wold, 709 b Yorke City, 701 Yorkeshire, ibid. Yorke Earles and Dukes, 724 e Yron Mynes and workes, 306 d Ystwith, 658 a Yvo Ellas, 675 c Yvor Bach, 642 e Z ZOuches, 201 f. 202 c. whence descended, 519 a Zouches of Haringworth and Ashby de la Zouch, 224 e Zouch Mortimer, 514 a Zouch killed in Westminster hall, 519 b Zythum, 20 THE NAMES OF SEVERALL Nations, Cities, and great Townes, Rivers, Pro∣montories or Capes, &c. of Britaine in old time; such as Caesar, Tacitus, Ptolemaeus, Antoninus, Notitia Provin∣ciarum, and other Authours, have made mention of: together with the later and moderne names. A A Ballaba, Appleby in Westmorland. 761 Abone, Avington or Aventon in Glocestershire. 358 Abus aestuarium, Humber in Yorkshire. 710 Aesica, Netherby upon Eske in Cumberland. 781 Ad Ansam, Neere Coggeshall in Essex. 449 Ad Pontem, Paunton in Lincolnshire. 537 Adurni Portus, Ederington. 313 Agelocum. Little borrough upon Trent. 549 Alone, Whitley in Northumberland. 794 Alannius flu. Avon in Wiltshire. 243 Alaunus flu. Alne in Northumberland. 813 Amboglanna, Ambleside, haply. 760 Ancalites, The Hundred of Henley. 389 Amnitum vel Samnitum Insulae, Isles upon the West coasts of Britaine in France, 221. p. 2 Andates Lucus, Anderida, Newenden in Kent. 351 Angli, sive Anglo-Saxones, Englishmen or English-Saxons. 127 Antona sive Aufona, Aufon. 507.508 Antivestaeum, The Cape of Cornwall. 187 Aquae Solis, Bath in Somersetshire. 233 Arbeia, Ierby. 769 Ariconium, Kenchester neere Hereford. 618 Atacoti, or Attacotti, 127 Atrebatii, or Attrebatii, Barkshire. 278 Augusta, See Londinum. Axelodunum. Hexham in Northumberland. 807 B BAdiza, Bath. 233 Bannavenna, or Bannaventa, Weedon on the street. 508 Belerium, The same that Antivestaeum. Belgae, Sommersetshire, Wilshire, and Hantshire. 219 Bellisama flu. Rhibell in Lancashire. 749 Bennones, High-Crosse. 518 Bibroci, The Hundred of Bray in Barkshire. 289 Binovium, Binchester. 738 Blatum Bulgium, Bulnesse in Cumberland. 775 Blestium, Old towne in Herefordshire. 787.617 Bonium, Banchor in Flitshire. 602.681 Bononia, Bollonge in France. 349 Borcovicus, Borwick in Northumberland. 809 Brannodunum, Brancerster in Norfolke. 488 Bremenium, Brampton in Northumberland. 803 Brementuracum, Brampton in Cumberland. 783 Brementonacum, Overborrow in Lancashire. 753 Brigantes, Yorkshire, Lancashire, B. of Durham, Westmorland, Cumberland. 685 Brovonacum, Brougham. 762 Bullaeum, Buelth in Brecknocshire. 627 Burrium, Uske in Monmouthshire. 636 C CAesarromagus, Neere Brentwood in Essex, fortè. 442 Calcaria, Tadcaster in Yorkeshire. 696 Callena, See Gallena. Camboritum, Cambridge. 486 Camalodunum, Maldon. 446 Camundolunum, See Cambodunum. Cambodunum, Ruins neere Aldmondbury in Yorkshire. 692 Calagum, See Galacum. Canonium, Chensford in Essex. 445 Cantum, Kent. 324 Cantium Promontorium, The foreland of Kent. 342 Cangi, 231 Castra Exploratorum, Burgh upon Sands. 773 Castra Constantia, Constance in Normandy. 224 Cassii, The hundred of Caishow in Hertfordshire. 395 Cassiterides, The Iles of Sylly. 227 Caturactonium, Cataricke in Yorkeshire. 730 Cartieuchlani, Buckingham, Bedford, and Hertfordshires. 391 Causennae, See Gausennae. Cenio flu. The river by Tregeny in Cornwall. 190 Ceni-magni, See Iceni. Cilurnum, Collerford in Northumberland. 806 Clausentum, South hanton. 261 Clevum, Glocester. 360 Coccium, Riblechester in Lancashire. 752 Colonia, Colchester in Essex. 450 Candate, Congleton in Cheshire. 608 Concangii, Baronie of Kendale. 759 Condercum, Chester upon the streete in the Bishopricke of Dur∣ham. 742 Combretonium, Brettenham in Suffolke. 463 Conovius flu. The river Conway in Wales. 669 Conovium urbs, Caer hean upon Conway in Caernarvonshire. ibid. Convennos insula, Convey at the Tamis mouth. 441 Congavata, A place upon Caudbecke in Cumberland. 778 Corinium, Circester or Cirencester in Glocestershire. 366 Coritani, Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire, Lin∣colnshire, Nottinghamshire, Darbyshire. 504 Cornavii, Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Cheshire. 560 Corstopitum, Morpit in Northumberland, fortè. 808 Cossini, 833 Croco-calana, Ancaster in Lincolnshire. 537 Cunetio, Marlborow or Kenet in Wiltshire. 255 Curia, Corebridge in Northumberland. 808 D DAnmonii, Cornwall and Denshire. 183 Danmoniorum Promontorium, The Lizard in Cornwall. 189 Danum, Dancaster in Yorkshire. 690 Delgovitia, Godmundham in Yorkshire, 711 Derventio, Auldby upon Derwent in Yorkshire. 709 Deva flu. Dee in Cheshire. Devana sive Deva urbs, Chester or West-chester. 604 Dictum, Diganwey. 669 Dimetae, Westwales, Caermardinshire, Penbrochshire, and Car∣diganshire. 647 Dobuni, sive Boduni, Glocestershire and Oxfordshire. 354 Dorobernia, See Dorovernum. Dubris, Dover. 344 Dunum sinus, The Creeke at Dunesby neere whitby in Yorkshire. 718 Ducornovia, See Corinium. Durotriges, Dorsetshire. 209 Dur-co-brivae, Redborn. 413 Durnium, See Durnovaria. Durobrivae, Caster neere Wandlesworth in Huntingdonshire. 501 Durnovaria, Dorcester. 212 Durobrovae, Rochester. 332 Durolenum, Leneham in Kent. 331 Durolitum, Old foord upon Lee in Essex. 439 Durosiponte, Gormonchester, 498 Durovernum, Canterbury, 336 E EBoracum, Yorke. 701 Epiacum, Papcastle in Cumberland. 768 Etoletum, The Wall in Staffordshire. 587 Extensio Promont. Easton Nesse in Suffolke. 467 F Fretum Britannicum, The streight of Callis. 345 G GAbranto vicorum portuosus sinus. Sureby in Yorkshire, 114 Gabrocentum, Gateshead in the Bishoprick of Durham. 743.818 Gallatum, Whealp-Castle in Westmorland. 762 Gallana, Walle-wic. 802 Gallena, Wallingford. 761 Ganganorum Promont. Lheyn in Caernarvonshire. 668 Garianonum, Yarmouth. 477 Garienis flu. Yare river in Norfolk. 476 Gausennnae, Brig-Casterton upon Wash. 534 Genunia, Northwales. 660 Glannoventa, Upon Wentsbeck in Northumberland. 812 Glessariae, 220 Glevum, Glocester. 366 Gobannium, Abergevenny. 635 Gessoriacum, See Bononia. H HErculis Promont. Herty point in Denshire. 207 Hunnum, Sevenshale in Northumberland. 801 I JAmesa, See Tamesis. Iceni, Suffolke, Norfolke, Cambridgshire, and Huntingdon∣shire, 456 Icianos, Icborrow in Norfolke. 482 Idumanus flu. Blackewater river in Essex. 448 Isannavaria, See Banavenna, for they seeme to be the same. Isca flu. Ex river in Denshire. 203 Isca Danmoniorum, Excester. ibid. Isca, Legio Augusta, Caer Lheon in Monmouthshire. 636 Iscalis, Ivelcester. 221 Isurium, Aldburge in Yorkshire. 701 Jugantes, whom Tacitus mentioneth; I wote not who they be, unlesse they were the Cantiani, that is, Kentishmen, whom the Welsh Britans were wont in their language to call Y-Gant. And yet it may seeme as probable, to read Brigantes, for Jugantes. 688 Itium Galliae, Vitsan. 348 Ituna flu. Eden river in Cumberland. 760.776 L LActodurum, sive Lactorodum, Stony-Stratford. 397 Lagecium, vel Legeolium, Castleford neere Pontfreit. 695 Legio 11. Augusta, See Isca. Legio 11. Victrix, See Eboracum. Legio xx. Victrix, See Deva. Lavatres, Bowes upon Stanemore. 731 Leucarum, Loghor in Southwales. 646 Littus Saxonicum, East and South coast. 325 Lemanis, Limehill or lime in Kent. 349 Lindum, Lincolne. 538 Londinum, London. 421 Longovicum, Lanchester. 754 Luguvallum, Carlile. 778 Loventium, Leveny in Brecknocshire. 628 M MAdus, Maidston in Kent. 330 Magi, Old Radnor. 623 Maglona, Maclenith in Montgomerishire. 661 Magna, Chester in the Wall neere Haltwessell. 800.801 Magnus Portus, Portesmouth, or Portchester. 268 Maleos, Mula among the Westerne Isles. 215 Mancunium, Manchester in Lancashire. 746 Mandevessedum, Mancester in Warwickeshire. 569 Magni, See Magi. Mediolanum, Lhan Vellin in Montgomerishire. 662 Magioninium, Dunstable. 402 Meatae, Northumberland. 796 Margid unum, Neere Bever-Castle. 536 Mena, Meneg in Cornwall. 186 Metaris aest. The Washes betweene Lincolnshire and Norfolke. 480 Mictis, See Vesta. Morbium, Morsby in Cumberland. 766 Maridunum, Caermarden. 649 Moridunum, Seaton in Devonshire. 206 Moricambe aest. The Bay of Caerdronack. 773 Morini, Morinorum Portus Britannicus, N. NIdus, Neath in Glamorganshire. 645 Neomagus, sive Noviomagus. Woodcote neere Croyden in Surrey, 302 Novus portus, See Lemanis. T OCtopitarum prom. S. Davids head in Penbrockshire. 653 Ocellum prom. Kelnsey in Yorkshire. 714 Olicana, Ilkeley in Yorkshire. 697 Olenacum, Elenborrow in Cumberland. 778 Ocrinum, See Danmonium. Ordovices, Northwales. 615.659 Ostidamnii, 183 Ottadini, Northumberland. 796 Othona, Ithan-cester in Essex. 443 P PArisi pop. Holdernesse in Yorkeshire. 709 Pennocrucium, Penkridge in Staffordshire. 583 Pettuaria, Beverley. 711 Petrianae, Some place neere Peterill in Cumberland. 777 Picti, The Picts. 114 Praesidium, Warwicke. 563 Praetorium, Patrington in Yorkshire. 713 Pontes, Colebrook in Buckinghamshire. 394 Pons Aelii, Pont-eland in Northumberland. 809 Procolitia, Coleceaster in Northumberland. 808 R RAtae, Leicester. 519 Ratostibius flu. Taf in Glamorganshire. 642 Regni pop. Surrey, Sussex, and the sea coasts of Hantshire. 295 Regnum, Ringwood in Hantshire. 259 Regulbium, Reculver in Kent. 335 Ribodunum, Riblechester. 752 Rhutupiae, Richborrow neere Sandwich. 340 Ru unium, Routon in Shropshire. 592 S SAbrina flu. Severn. 661 Salenae, Salndy in Bedfordshire. 401 Segodunum, Seton in Northumberland. 811 Segontium, Caer Seiont neere Caernarvon. 66 Segontiaci, In Hantshire. 26 Setantiorum Palus, Winandermer. 119 Scoti, Scots. 684 Seteia aestuar. pro Deia, Deemouth. 604 Segelocum, See Agelocum. Silures, Southwales. 615 Sitomagus, Theiford in Norfolke. 471 Simeni, See Iceni. Sinus salutaris, See Gabrantovicorum. Sorbiodunum, Old Sarisbury. 246 Spinae, Spene neere Newbury. 283 Stuccia flu. Istuyth in Cardig anshire. 658 Sulloniacae, Brockley hill neere Ellestrey. 415 T TAmarus flu. Tamar. 196 Tamara, Tamarton. ibid. Tamisis, Tamis, or Teamis. 384 Tanatos, Tanet. 339 Tesis flu. Tese. 736 Tina flu. Tine in Northumberland. 799 Toisobios, See Conovius. Tobius flu. Tovy in Wales. 649 Toliatis, Shepey. 333 Trajectus, Passage neere Aust. 358.363 Trinobantes, Midlesex, and Essex. 417 Tripontium, Torcester. 505 Trisantonis Portus, Southanton. 260 Tucsis, Berwick upon Twede. 816 Tuerobius flu. Tivie in Wales. 657 Tunocellum, Tin mouth. 811 Trutulensis Portus, See Rhutupia, Tacitus named Trutulensis, for Rutu∣pensis: as B. Rhenanus supposeth. V VAgniacae, Maidstone. 330 Valentia, 797 Vallum, The Picts Wall. 789 Varis, Bod-vary in Flintshire. 679 Viroconium, Wroxcester. 593 Vedra flu. Were in the B. of Duresme. 738 Veneti, Guineth, or Northwales. 660 Venta Belgarum, Wintchester. 263 Venta Icenorum, Caster neere Norwich. 473 Venta Silurum, Caer Went in Monmouthshire. 633 Vennones, High-Crosse. 518 Verlucio, Werminster. 245 Verometum, Burrow hill in Leicestershire. 522 Verolamium, Verulam neere S. Albons. 408 Verterae, Burgh upon Stanemore. 760 Uzella aestuar. Ivel-mouth. 221 Viconia, See Vinovium. Vinonium aut Binonium, Binchester in the Bishopricke of Duresme. 738 Villa Faustini, S. Edmunds Bury. 459 Vindelis, Haply, old Winchelsey. 319 Vindobala, See Vindomora. 776 Vindomora, Wallesend in Northumberland. 811 Vindonum, Silceaster. 270 Vindolana, Winchester in the wall. 809 Vindogladia, Winburne in Dorsetshire. 215 Virecium, Wroxester in Shropshire. 593 Virosidum, Werewic upon Eden neere Carlile. 778 Voluba, Volemouth. 189 Voreda, Old Perith. 776 Usocona, Oken yate. 593 Uzella, Lost-Uthiel. 190.221.225 A Table or Index to Scot∣land. A ABerbroth or Arbroth, 44 c Abercorn, 15 d Abercornor Abercuyning, 28 d Abereorneth, ibid. d Aberdon new and old, 46 c Ab-Thanes, 7 d Adain what it signifieth, 13 f Aire a Sherifdome, 20 c Ainza, 49 b Albainy, 39 a Dukes thereof, ibid. b Albinich, who they be, 39 e Alclith, 37 c Al-cluid, 25 a Alectum, 43 c Alexander Duke of Albanie, kil∣led, 39 c Amber, 48 b. name thereof, ibid. c Amund, or Almund a river, 40 Andrews an Archbishoprick, 7 a Andrews, 32 f Anguis or Angus, 43 a Earles thereof, 45 a Annan a river, 16 d Annandale, ibid. Annandale a Territorie, ibid. Apollo Grannus, 13 e Aptera, 14 a Arbella Steward a learned and noble Ladie, 26 a Archibald Duglasse Earle of Anguis, 12 d Ar-Cluid what it is, 25 a Ardmanoch, 52 b Ardossan, 21 c Argathelia or Argile, 37 a Argile Earles, ibid. e Argetorix a pety Prince, 32 b his wife how she answered Iulia the Empresse, ibid. b Argonauts, 38 c Armitage, 16 c Arran Isle, 22 a Arran Earles, 22 b Arrol, 42 e. Earles thereof, ibid. Arthurs Chaire, 14 c Arthurs Oven, 28 f Assinshire, 52 a Athelstanford, 12 d Athol infamous for witches, 40 b Earles thereof, 40 c Iohn Earle of Athol hanged on high, 40 d Aubigni or Obigni Lords, 26 b Eberad de Aubigni his de∣vise and coat of Armes, 28 c Aven a river, ibid. c Azur gotten, 22 e B BAclugh surnamed Scot, a family, 16 b Baileries or Bailiwickes, 7 c Baileries and Ballives their ori∣ginall, 20 a Balmerinoch, an Abbey and Ba∣rony, 34 d Bamff, 49 a Banbrich, a place, 34 d Banoc bourn, 30 a Bankquo, 51 d Bargeney, or Berigonium, 19 e Barons, 7 e Bas, an Iland, 12 f Bean Castle, 50 a Beares in Britaine, 30 f Bernswell, 54 d Berigonium Castle, 38 d Berth, 41 a Berubium, 54 d Berwicke Sheriffdome, 10 c.d Bissets, kinred, 40 c Bitumen, 32 e Black-knight, 41 a Black-nesse Castle, 15 e Bluidno a river, 18 c Boen, 49 a Boides Barons, 21 c Borderers, their behaviour, 18 a Borthwicke a Baronie, 13 b Boschain, 44 f Bothwell Earles, 23 d Braid Albin, 39 a Brankensey, 16 b Brechin, 44 c Brendanus, 22 c Brochty Crag, 43 b Brun-Albin, 39 b Bruses Lords of Annandale, 16 e Brus discomfiteth the English, 30 b Buchanan, 29 a Beavis Bulmer, 22 c Buquhan, 47 f Buquhan Earles, 48 d Buth, 22 c C CAer Guidi, 15 d Caer Laverocke, 17 e Caledonia in Scotland, 30 c used for all Britaine, 31 e Caledonia in Epirus, 30 e Caledonian wood, 30 e. 40 c Caledonii whence they tooke name, 30 d Castle Callendar, 29 b Cambels a family, 22 f Cambel Castle and Barony, 37 e Camelot, 29 a Candida Casa, 18 f Cantire, 38 a Cardines a fort, 18 e Carrict a Baillery, 20 a. 19 e Carric t Earles, 20 a Carron a riveret, 28 c Cassile a Castle, 19 f Carthcart a river, 24 b Cathanesse, 53 d Cathnesse Earles, ibid. Cathcart a Baron, 24 b Craufords a family, 20 f Celurca, that is, Mont-Ross, 44 Cerones, 52 e Chanonry, ibid. d Clackmans a Sheriffdome, 32 Claick-geese, 48 b Clannes, 39 f Clan Haton, 35 c Clan mack Duff, ibid. c Clan Ranalds a bloody generati∣on, 52 c Cluid, what it signifieth, 25 a Cluid a river, 23 Cluidsdale, 22 d Clydsforth or Cluydforth, 18 c Cockeram of a Mason became Earle of Mar, 47 d Cole plot, 32 e Coldingham, 10 e. Colledge of Iustice, 8 d Columban, 38 e Combat between Sir Iames Lin∣desey and Baron Wels, 22 f Comin or Cumen, a mighty fami∣ly, 36 e Comin a mighty man murdered by Robert Brus, 17 d Commissariats, 8 f Commissioners, ibid. b Commons, 7 f Constablery, 6 e Constables of Scotland, 19 c Corneth a river, 28 d County, the same that Sheriff∣dome, 6 d County Courts, 8 e Courts Civil, ibid. f Courts of criminall causes, 9 a Crauford Moore, 22 e Crauford Castle and Earlededom, 22 e Creightons a family, 17 c Cromarty, 52 d Cromer, ibid. e Cross, 14 c Cruickston, 24 b Culros, a Barony, 32 d Cumbernald, 29 c Cuningham a towne, 21 a Cuninghams a numerous family, 21 f. their coat of Armes, ibid. Cuninghams Earles of Glencarn, 17 e. 21 f Cupre, 34 b D DAl, 37 c Dalkeith, 13 b Dalrea, 37 c Dalrendini, ibid. Dalrieta, 37 d Darly Lords, 24 b L. Darly husband to Mary Queen of Scots, 22 c David heire to the Crowne of Scotland, famished, 39 c David the first King of Scotland a religous Prince, 10 e Daies longest, 54 b Dee a river, 18 e. 46 a Depth of the sea, 52 c Dessie a french Captaine, 12 a Dicalidonis, 5 a. 30 c Disert, 32 e Diocesses first set out by Diony∣sius Bishop of Rome, 65 Donald of the Isles, 53 a Done a river, 46 a Dornock, 53 e Douglasse. See Duglasse. Dromund Barons, 36 a. Women of that race right beautifull, ibid. Drum Albin, 39 b Drimem Castle, 36 a Drumlanrig, 17 d Duff a King murdred, 49 f Duglasse or Douglasse a river, 23 a Duglas dale, ibid. Duglasse Castle, ibid. a Duglasse a noble and ancient fa∣mily, ibid. a. their armes, ibid. b Duglasse Earles of Angus, 36 c. Duglasse Earles of Morton, 17 d Duglasse a fast friend unto King Rob. Brus, 23 a Duglasse Earle of Wigton, Duke of Tourain, 23 b Duke a title, when first brought into Scotland, 7 e Dun a river, 19 f Dunbarre, 11 c Dunbarton Sheriffdome, 25 c Dunblan a Bishopricke, 36 Dunbritton or Dunbarton, 25 a Dunbritaine frith, 18 c Duncaves bay, 54 d Dun Dee, 43 c Dunfermling, 32 d Dunfermling Earle, 32 d Dunfreis, 17 d Duni pacis what they be, 28 e Dunkelden, 41 a Dunotyr Castle, 45 d Dunnur a Castle, 20 a Dunsby, 54 d Dunstafag, 38 d Duplin Castle, 36 b Dyrlton, 12 e E EBba Prioresse of Coldingham Nunnery, 10 f. Her chasti∣ty and her Nunnes ib. daugh∣ter of Edelfrid king of North∣humberland, 11 a Saint Ebbes promontory, ibid. a Eden or Ethan a river, Edenburough, 13 f Edenburough Frith, ibid. Eglington a Castle and family, 21 d Elfeing ston a Barony, 29 c Elgina, 49 e Iohn Eriskin earle of Mar. 47 e Th. Ereskin, Baron of Dyrlton, Vicount Felton: first Vicount in Scotland, 12 e Ern a noble river, 35 f Esk a river, 13 b Esterlings, 29 d F FAlkland, 34 Fast-castle, 10 f Fergus, 39 b Fergus Lord or Prince of Gal∣loway, 19 b. His Armes, ibid. c became a Chanon, ibid. Fernhersts a Barony, 10 b Fleanch the Sonne of Banquo, 51 e Fl et a river, 18 e Flemings, Barons, 29 c Iohn Lord Fleming Earle of Wigton, 18 e Fife, 32 c Fif-Nesse, ibid. f Fife Earles their priviledge, 35 Forces, 49 e Forbois Barons, 46 b Fordon, 45 e Iohn de Fordon, ibid. Forth or Frith, 12 e Fresian sea, ibid. G GAlgac or Galauc, 31 f Galloway, 18 Galloway Ecles, ibid. Galloway nagges, ibid. Galloway Princes & Lords, 19 b Gentlemen, 7 f George of Dunbarre Earle of Merch, 11 b Girnego, 53 d Glamys, a Baron, 43 b Glasco an Archbishopricke, 7 Glasco an University and Arch∣bishops See, 23 d Glencarn, 17 e Glines, 38 Glotta, See Arran, 22 Gordons Earles of Huntly, 49 Gospatrick, Earle of Northum∣berland, 11 b Goury a Country, 42 c Gouryes conspiracy, 12 b Grahams dike, 28 d Granni, what they are, 13 e Grantzbain or Gramphil, 30 e Greies of Chillingham, 43 c Guith what it signifieth, 15 d H HAdinne or Hadington, 12 Vicount Hadington, ibid. Haies Earles of Aroll, ibid. Haies family almost extingui∣shed, 36 b Haliburtons a family, 12 e Haskhead, 24 b Hamilton Castle, 23 c. a family, ibid. their originall, ibid. Iames Hamilton Earle of Aber∣corn, 15 d Hamilton of Peyle, ibid. e Iames Hamilton Regent of Scot∣land, and Duke of Chasteau, Herald in Poicton, 23 d Iohn Marquesse of Hamilton, 23 Hay a strong and valiant man, 42 e Hector Boetius, an Elegant Hi∣toriographer, 43 d Height of Hills, 52 c Hellan Leneoc, 22 c Hellan Tinoc, ibid c Hepburnes a family, 16 b Earles of Bothwell, ibid. 23 d Herris Baron, 17 e Hii an Iland, 38 e Highlandmen, 39 e. their de∣scription, ibid. Holy Ruid house, 14 c Horesci a people, 16 c Henry Percy Hotspurre taken prisoner by Montgomery, 21 d Howburn, 54 d Hume Castle, 10 d Humes a great and noble family, 10 e Hume created Earle, ibid. e Hume Earle of Dunbarre, 11 f Huntly Castle, 42 f I IAmes the second, King of Scots untimely slaine and much missed, 10 b Iames the sixth, King of great Britaine, 25 f Ied a river, 10 a Iedburgh, 9 f I-comb-kil, 38 e Iland floating, 24 e Inborow and Outborow, 11 b Inch-Chafra, 36 b Inch Keith an Iland, 15 d Innerlothan, 50 b Innermeth, 36 b Innernes, 50 b Iohns towne, 41 c Iohn Duke of Albany honoured by the French, 39 d Iohnstons a warlike family, 16 e Irwin a river, 21 b Irwin a burrough, ibid. c Iulius Hoff, 28 f K KAledon, 30 d Keiths a family ancient and noble, 45 a Kelso, 10 e Ken a river, 18 e Kennedies a noble family, 19 f Kennedie Earle of Cassile, ibid. Kerrs a family, 10 b Kerr Baron, ibid. Kerr Earle of Lothien, 15 f Kilconath, 20 a Kildrummi, 46 a Kile, 20 c Kilflos, 49 f Killian a river, 52 Kilmarnocke, 21 b Kilmonorock, 24 f Kincardin, 36 e King of Scotland, 7 e Kinghorn Earle, 32 c Kinlosse, 49 f Kinnadie, 37 d Kinrosse, 32 c Kirkbird, 36 c Kirkonbright, 18 Knapdale, 38 c Knights solemnly dubbed, 7 e Kyle, See Kile. L LAdeni, 9 Lairds, 7 e Lanric a Sheriffdome, Largis, 21 d Lauden or Lothien, 11 d Lauther a riveret and towne, 10 Leave a lake, 38 d Leeth a river, 15 Lennox, 24 d Lennox Earles, 25 d Lennox Dukes, their Armes, 26 Lesley the noble Knight, 52 f Leth an Haven town. 15 c Levin a river, 29 d Levinia, ibid. Levin a lake and river, 32 e Levingstons Barons, 29 c Levingston first Earl of Lithquo, 15 c Lin what it signifieth, ibid. e Lindeseies a noble family, 22 f. 36 Lindum, 15 e Lions a family, 43 b Lithquo, or Linlithquo, 15 e Logh Aber a lake, 38 d Logh Cure a lake, 17 c Logh Erre a lake, 35 f Logh Fin, 38 a Logh Kinkeram, 38 d Logh Lomund, 24 d. 36 e Logh Luthea or Louthea, 50 a Logh Lothes, 51 d Logh Nesse, 50 a Logh Rhian, 19 b Lough Maban, 16 d Loghuabrie, 51 c Longas a river, 20 f Lough longus, 52 e Lords who they be, 7 e Lorgis slew Henry the Second K. of France running at Tilt, 52 Lorn a family, 38 c Lorn, ibid. Lovet Castle, 52 c Loxa or Losse a river, 49 e Lowland men, 5 c Loundoris a Monastery and Ba∣rony, 34 d M MAc-Conels, 38 b Mac-Duff first Ea le of Fife, 35 b Maden Castle, or Virgins Castle, 14 c Mailross, 10 a Malcolm Canmor, 11 a Mar. 46 a. Earles, 47 c Marchidun, 10 Mareschals of Scotland, 45 e Q. Mary deposed by her base brother Iames, 51 b Marquesse a title, when first brought into Scotland, 7 e Martha enamoured upon Robert Brus, made him her husband, 20 a Maxwell Earle of Morton, 17 e Maxwels a family, 16 Menteith, 36 d. Earles thereof, ibid. c Merch or Mers, 10 d Merch Earles, 11 a Mernis, 45 d Methwen or Methven a Barony, 42 b Metellan Baron Thirlestan, 10 Monkes living upon their owne hand labour, 10 Montgomeries a family, 21 Monuments of stone, with their inscriptions, 27.28 Montrosse, 44 c Montrosse Earles, 36 e Morton a place, 17 d Mor wiridh, 12 e Mull of Galloway, 19 b Murdack executed, 35 d Murray, 49 c Murrey Earles, 50 f Murth-lake, 46 Murscamp, 36 b Musselborow a towne, 13 b Musselborow field, ibid. c N NAbe a river, 53 f Napier a learned man, 13 c Nardin or Nan Sheriffdom, 50 Nesse mouth, 52 d Nesse a Lake, 38 d Newbottle a Monastery and Ba∣rony, 13 b Nida river, 17 c Nidisdale, ibid. Nights shortest, 54 b Ninian Bishop of Candida casa, 18 f North Berwick, 12 e O OGilvi Barons, 44 f Oliphant Barons, 36 b Olorina an hearb, 49 e P PAlladius Apostle for the Scottish Nation, 45 f Parliament, 8 a Pasley a Monastery and Barony, 24 b Peblis a Towne, 10 c Penvael or Penvallon, 28 d Perth the City, 41 b Perth Sheriffdome, 40 b Perth Earle, 42 a Picts divided into two Nations, 5 a Picts, 30 d Pictland, 11 d Pollac a fish, 24 d Portus Salutis, 52 e Ponuny a fort, 21 c Princes simply, 7 Prince of Scotland, ibid. Prophesie of a Stone, 42 d R RAmsey, Vicount Hadingson 12 b. his faithfulnesse and valour, ibid. Ramsey Earle Bothwell, 23 d Ratra a river, 48 a Ravins trench, 32 e R dhead a Cape, 44 e Regimund, 32 f Reinfraw a towne and Baronie, 24 a Rethven the name of a Castle and Barony, 42 b Rethvens Conspiracy, ibid b Rheuda, 37 c Rian a river, 19 b Robert, Bishop of Cathanes, Earle of Lennox▪ and of Merch, 11 c Rosburge or Roxburg, 10 a Rossia or Rosse, 52 a Rosse Earles, ibid. f Rosse Barons, 24 b Rothamay Castle, 49 b Rothes Earle, 35 e. 49 d Rothes Castle, 49 d Rothsay Castle, 22 c Rothsay Dukedome, ibid c Routs, 38 b S SAlmons, 47 a Salmons breed, ibid. a Salmons hunted, 17 f Salton Barons of Abernethy, 45 b Sanctuary, 35 c Sauhquer Castle, 17 c Barons Sauhquer, ibid. Scone 42 c. a Baronie, 42 c Scotish Sea, 12 A troupe of Scots in France, 25 c Scotland divided into seven parts, 5 c, d Scoutes, 12 f Seincler Barons, 32 e Selkirk, 10 c Sempil a place and Barony, 24 c Seneschalsies, 6 c The Session 8 d. by whom insti∣tuted and when, ibid. Seton, 13. a towne and noble fa∣mily, 13 a Sheriffdomes, 6 c Sheriff, 8 c Sheriff of Teviot Dale, 10 b Slugh hounds, 18 b Soland geese, 12 f Solway a village, 17 d Somervill Baron, 23 a South Esk a river, 44 d Spey a river, 49 d Speyny castle, 49 Sterling Stewarty or Territory, 26 c Sterling towne, ibid. Sterlin or Strivelin a towne, 29 Sterling or Esterling money, ib. States or Degrees of Scotland, 7 c Stewarties, 6 c Stewarts family how it began and arose, 51 f Stewards a noble family of the blood royall, 20 f Sir Iames Stewart guardian to Iames Hamilton, 22 b Stewarts the royall line of Scot∣land whence descended, 25 d Walter Stewart Earle of Athol, for his parricide cruelly exe∣cuted, 40 f Strath bolgy, 49 b Strathern, 35 Straith Ern, ibid. f. Earles there∣of, 36 d Strath Navern, 53 f Struthers, 34 b Suit between Robert Brus and Iohn Bailioll, 17 a Sutherland, 53 b T TAichia, a Territory, 36 e Tantallon Castle, 12 d Taodunum, 43 c Tarbarth, 52 e Tarbar, 38 d Tarvus what it signifieth, 54 d Taw the river, 35 c Taw overfloweth, 41 a Teifidale, 9 Teith or Taith, river, 36 d Tenariff, an exceeding high hill, 52 c God Terminus, 26 . his temple, 28 f Teviot a river, 10 d Thanes, 7 d. what they are, 35 b Thirlestan a place and Barons honour, 10 c Tine a little river, 11 f Toricles, Barony of the Lord Hereis, 17 e Tulibardin castle, 36 a. a Baro∣ny, ibid. and Earledome, ibid. Twede a river, 10 c Twedesdale, ibid. V V Turned into M. 45 d Uchiltrey Castle, 20 f Uchiltrey Barons, 21 a Ucthred Fergus his sonne mur∣dred by his brother Gilbert, 19 Vecturiones, 5 a. 30 c Vicount a title, when first brought into Scotland, 7 e Underthanes, ibid. d Urdehead, 54 d W WAll of Hadrian, 26 f Wall of Antonius Pius, 27 a Water of an admirable nature 48 a Wemeseies a kinred, 35 c Wemmis a Castle and noble fa∣mily, 32 e Whitherne, that is, Candida ca∣sa, 19 a Wifle, a river, 53 d Wigton an Haven-towne, 18 e Wilford a valiant English Cap∣taine, 12 a Wolves, 54 a Y YOung Knight Pedagogue unto King Iames the sixth, 13 Z ZEister a place and Barony, 12 a Zester a Baron, 10 c A Table of the names of severall people and places of more ancient record in Scotland. ABravanus, Rian the river and Logh-Rian the Lake, 19 Alauna, about Sterlin, 30 Bod tria▪ flu. The forth and frith, Edenborrough Frith, 12 Caledonia and Caledonii, 30 Cantae, the people inhabiting Rosse, 52 Carbantorigum, Caerlaverock, 17 Catini. The inhabitants of Ca∣thanesse, 53 Cornabii. The people of Strath∣navern, 53 Castra alata or Castrum alatum, 52. Edenborrough, 13 Cerones, Assinshire, 52 Calonia Coldingham, 52 Colnie, flu. The river Killian, 22 Corda a town neere Logh-Cure, 17 Coria Damniorum, haply Came∣lot, 29 Creones, See Cerones. Damnii, people of Cluydsdale, Re fraw Barony, Lenox, Stri∣velin, Menteth and Fife, 22 Dea flu. The river Dee, 18 Diva flu. The river Dee, 46 Epidii, people of Caledonia, 30 Gadeni or Ladeni, Teisidale, Twededale, Merch and Lo∣thien, 9 Glota ins. The Ifle Arran, 22 Gran pius Mons, Grantzbaine, 28,30 Horesci, haply the people inhabi∣ting Esk-dale, 16 Iena. The river Ken, 18 Ila flu may seeme to be the river Wifle, 53 Ladeni, See Gadeni. Lelanonius flu The river Levin, 24 Leucopibia, haply Candida Casa or Whitherne, 18 Lindum, Linlithquo or Lithquo, 1 Littus altum seemeth to be Tar∣barth, 52 Longus flu. Loughlonges, ibid. Loxa flu. The river Losse, 49 Novantes. People of Galloway, Carick Kyle & Cuningham, 18 Mertae, in Sutherland, Novantum Chersonesus sive Promontorium. The Mull of Galloway, 19 Nodius flu. The river Nid, 17 Orcas sive Tarverdrum. How∣bune, 54 Randvara. Reinfraw, 24 Rerigonium. Bargeny, 19 Selgovae. The people of Lidesdale Evesdale, Eskdale, Annandale and Nidisdale, 16 Tamea, haply Tanea in Rosse. Taizali. The people of Buquahan 47 Tarvedrum promont. See Orcas. Tans flu. Tau the river, 35, 41 Vacomagi. The people of Mur∣ray, 49 Vararis. Murray, ibid. Vernicones, haply Mernis, 45 Victoria, haply Inch-Keith, 15 Vidogara, haply Aire, 20 Virvedrum, See Orcas. Uzellum, a place in Eusdale, 16 The Families of greater worth and honour in Scotland in this Booke mentioned. A ABercorne Earle, 15 Aberneth or Abernothy, 36 Albanie Duk s, 39 Angus or Anguis Earl s, 4 Areskin, See Ereskin, Ardmanoch, 52 Arol Earles, 42 Argilo E rles, 37,38 Arran Earles, 22 Athol Earles, 40 Aubigny or Obigny Lords, 26 B BAclugh, 16 Balmerinoch, 34 Bothwell Earles, 48 Buquhan Earles, 48 Borthwicke Barons, 13 Boids Barons, 21,22 Brus, 16,19 C CAmbell, 37 Cassile Earles, 19 Crawford Earles, 22 Cathanes Earles, 53 Creictons Barons Sauhquer, 17, 51 Carthcart, 24 Carliles, Carrict Bailives and Earles, 20 Chasteau Herald Duke, 23 Clan-Hatan, 35 Clan-Ranald, 52 Colvil, 32 Comen, 36.45.48 Culrosse, 32 Cuningham, 21 D DArnley or Darley, 24 Douglasse or Duglasse, 19 23.45.48 Dromund, 36 Dunbarre Earles, 11 Dunfirmling Earle, 13.32 E EGlington Earles, 21 Eriskin, 12.29.47 Elphingston, 29.34.49 F FIvie Baron, 32 Fleming, 18.29 Forbois, 46 Frasers, 52 Felton Vicount, 12 Fife Earles, 35 G GOrdon, 49 Glencarn Earles, 21 Glamys Baron, 44 Graham, 36 Goury, 42 Greyes, 44 Galloway Lords, 693 H HAdington Vicount, 12 Halyburton, ibid. Hamilton, 15.22.23 Huntley, 13.42.49 Hepburn, 16 Hereis or Herris, 17 Hides, 36.42 Home or Hume Baron de Ber∣wicke, 11 Hume Earle, ibid. I INnermeth, 36 K KEith, 45 Kennedis, 19 Kir, 10.15 Kinghorn Earle, 32.44 Kinloss, 49 L LEvenox or Lennox Earles, 25 Lindeseies, 22.44.49 Lesley, 34.49 Levingston, 29 Leon or Lion, 32.43 Lovet, 52 Linlithquo or Lithquo Earle, 15 Lorn Lords, 38.49 Lothien Earle, 15 Lundoris, 34 M MAc-Conell, 38 Mac-Intoscech, 35 Mar Earles, 47 Marshall Earles, 45 Maxwels, 18 Menteith Earle, 36 Merch Earles, 11 Methwen, 42 Murray Earles, 50 Montrose, 44 Montgomeries Earles, 21 Morton Earle, 17 Murray, 36.40.42 N NEwbottle, 69 O ORkeney Earles, 53 Olyphant, 36 Ogilvy or Ogilby, 44 P PEarth Earle, 42 R RAmsey, 12.23 Randolph, 50 Reinfraw, 24 Rethwen, 42 Rothes Earle, 35.49 Rothsay Dukedome, 22 Roos, 24 Rosse Earles, 52 Roxburgh, 10 S SCone, 42 Scot, 16 Steward, 25.48.51 Sutherland Earles, 53 Seincler, 32.53 Somervill, 23 Seton, 13 Sempell, 24.49 Sauhquer or Sanquer, 17 Salton, 49 Strathern Earles, 36 Spiny, 49 T TOricles, 17 Thirlestan 10 Tulibardin, 36 V URquhart, 52 Uchiltrey, 21 W WEmmis, 32 Wintwoun Earle, 13 Wigton Earle, 18 Z ZEister or Zester, 10.12 A Table of Ireland, and the Isles adjoyning to BRITAINE. A ABsenties, 85 Admirall of England, ex∣tent of his authority, 232 Alderney, 214 Anglesey, 203 Antrim County, 112 Annales of Ireland, 150 Annales of the Isle of Man, 205 Arran, 99.214 Armagh County, 107 Arklo, Lords thereof, 90 Arts and piety sowed among na∣tions in sundry ages, 85 B BAgnall, 121 &c. Bannomanna, 62 Barry, 78 Base poole, 227 Bernacles, 204 Barnwell, 94.95 Berminghams, 100 Bingham, 10 .103 Bissets, 113 Bishopricks of Ireland, 73. Poore, 106 Blunt, Lord Montjoy, 77.105 107. Deputy, 133, &c. Boyle Barony, 103 Brehon Law, 140 Britaines inhabite Ireland, 65 Britain herbe, 222 Brittain Huis, 221 Brittish Armory, ibid. Brittish sea, 57. where deepest, 227 Burk, 81.100.101.104.117 &c. Burgus, what. 222 Buth, 22 Butiphant Vicount, 78 Butler, 82.88. &c. Burrough Baron, Lord Deputy, 115 C CAesarea, 65 Cavon County, 106 Cahir Baron, 82 Carew, 76.79.85 Carick Earle, 82 Carausius, 88 Cassiles Archbishop, 82 Casquets, 224 Castle-Conell Baron, 81 Caterlough County, 85 Cattell, 63 Cavanaghes, 85 Causes of rebellion, 101 Caurus the winds, 59 Chamberlan, 224 Cerne Island, 62 Chamber of Ireland, 95 Chevers, 90 Chairly Boy, 113 Clany-boy, Clan-Moris, 75 Clancar Earle, 76 Clan-Donels, 101 Clan William, 81 Clan Gibbon, ibid. Clogher Bishopricke, 115 Clare County, 98 Clan Richard Earles, 100 Cogan, 70.79 Connacht or Conaught, 98 Colby, 86 Conaught Lords, 104 Constables of Ireland, 97 Colran County, 114 Columb Saint, 215 Corke, County, 77. a kingdome, 79 Courts of Ireland, 72 Coner Bishopricke, 111 Curraghmore Barons, 79 Croft Sir Hugh slaine, 179 Curcy, 71.77.53.209 Curthbert a Saint, 220 Cuttings, Coyne, Liverie, 76.101. D DArcy, 96 Deemstert, 204 Delton, 96 Dalvin Baron, ibid. Deputies of Ireland, 71 Desmond Earles, 76 Dessie Vicount, 79 Diseases in Ireland, 63 Devereux, 90 Dillon, 96 Donell Gormy, 102 Docwra, 133, &c. Dublin County, 91. Citie and U∣niversity, 92. Marques, 94 Duke of Ireland, ibid. Dunboin Baron, 85 Dunganon Baron, 115 Durgarvan Barony, 79 Dunkellin Baron, 100 Dansany Baron, 95 216 E ENglishmen first entred Ire∣land, 70 Eastmeath, 95 Essex Earle, 112. Lord Deputy, 117 Ewst, 216 F FArn Island, 220 Fermoy Vicount, 78 Farn, Isle, 220 Fermanagh County, 106 Fitz Eustace Barons, 88 Fitz-Patric, 8 Fitz-Geralds, 82.87 Fitz-Stephens, 70.79.89 Fitz-William Lord Deputy, 121, &c. Fitz-Urse, 107 Fortunate Isles, 217 Frozen sea, 219 G GArnesey, 224 Galloglasses, 101.147 Galloway County, 99 Gavalock, 122 Genevill, 97.163 Gersey, 224 Glinnes, 90.113 Goodwin sands, 222 Gormanston Vicount, 95 Lord Grey, 75 H HAwkes, 63 Hereditarie territories of England in France, 232 Hy, Island, 216 Hirth, ibid. Hobies, 63 Holy Crosse of Tiperary, 82 Holy Island, 62.220 Holy-wood, 94 Horses, 63 Houth Barons, 94 Husey, 95 I IBarcan Baron, 99 Ila, 215 Ienevill, see Genevill. Iona, ibid. Iniskellin, 106.112.101 Ireland called Ogygia, 64. called Scotia, 66.117. inhabited by Britaines, 65. not conquered by Romans, 66. entred by Henrie the second, 69. devided, 72. neglected, 118 Irishmen out of Spaine, 66 Irish Monkes, 67.110. taught the English to write, 68. their Manners, 140 Ireland neglected, 218 K KErry County, 75 Kilkenny County, 84 Kildare County, 87. Earles, Killalo Bishopricke, 100 Killin Baron, 95 Kinsale, 135 Kings County, 86 Kernes, 147 Knight of the Valley, 81 Konctoe battell, 100 L LAcy, 82.95.96, &c. 203 Leinster, 84 Leinster Marquesse, 94 Leicestre, 86 Letrim County, 103 Letrim Baron, ibid. Levison, 135 Limerick County, 81 Lewis, 216 Lindisfarn, 220 Lixnaw Baron, 75 Lovell, 85 Longford County, 97 Londey, 202 Louth County, 105. Earle, ibid. Baron, 106 Lycanthropia a disease, 83 M MAc Andan, 85 Mac Carty, 77 Mac-Clen, 216 Mac Connell, 102.113.216 Mac Guilly, 113 Mac Donells, 120 Mac Guir, 106.121 Mac Genis, 109.120 Mac Mahon, 107 Mac Morogh, 69 Mac William, 101.104 Mac Teg, 77 Man Isle, 203. Lords, 213 Mac Swin, 117 Mac Shees, 82 Majo County, 100 Mandeviles, 109.213 Marshall E. of Penbroke, 70, 86 87.155 Marshall of Ireland, 72 Malachie a Saint, 108 Meth, 94. the Bishop, 95. the Lords, 96 Messet, 155 Monaghan County, 107 Mont-Garret Vicount, 89 Mont-Norris, 107.134 More, 105 Morley, 72 Munster, 74 Muscegros, 99 N NAngle, 96 Navan a Baronet, 95 Nogente or Nugent, 96 Norris Sir Iohn, 122, &c. Normandie lost, 226 O OBrien, 82 O-Brins, 89 O-Cahan, 114 O-Carell, 69 O-Conor Dun, 102.104 O-Donell, 117 O-Hagan, 109 O-Hanlon, ibid. O-Kelly, 103 Ogygia, 62 O-Mahon, 76 O-Maily, 86 O-More, ibid. O-Neale election, 114.120 Earle of Tir-Oen, 122, &c. Oleron, 232 O-Pharoll, 97 O-Quin, 131 O-Reyley, 106 Orcades Isles, 216. Earles, 217 Ormond, 82 O-Rorke, 103 O-Swilivant, 76 Ossery Earle, 82 Ougans, 88. O-Tooles, 89 P PAlladius, 67 Pearles, 59 Pelagius, an Arch-heriticke, 111 Perot, 103 Phelipot, a good Patriot, 224 Poers, Barons of Curraghmore, 79 Prestholm, 20 , Preston, 95 Professions hereditarie, 141 Plonkets, 94.95.96 Q QUe nes County, 86 R RHeban Baronets, 86 Ridiculous conceit, 75 Ringrom Baron, 77 Roch. Baron, 78 Roscomon County, 103 Russell Lord Deputy, 121 Rugge, 63 S SAlmons, 59.114 Savage, 112 Saint Bernard, 103 Saint Brigid, 87 Saint Laurence, Baron of Houth, 94. Saint Michael, 86 Saint Patrickes Sepulcher, 110 Purgatory, 116 Saint Owen, 227 Saxons Islands, 220 Scalmey, 202 Serk, 227 Scots, 117 Shaving of Irish, 107 Shires of Ireland, 37 Shetland, 219 Sidny, Lord Deputy, 97.121 Silly Isles, 227 &c. Slane Baron, 95 Slego County, 102 Small Island, 201 Smyris a stone, 225 Steward of Ireland, 80 Spaniards in Ireland, 75.77 Stanihurst a learned man, 66 Steptholme, 202 Stella Maria, 230 Stockholme, 202 Strongebow, 69.87 Stukeley, 94 Surley Boy, 113 Sussex Earle Lord Deputy, 121 T TAlbot, 79, 80, 94, 155 Tanistry, 141 Thule, 218 Three sisters, 84 Tipperary County, 82. Earle, ibid. Tirconel County, 115 Tirell, 91, 96 Tiroen County, 114 Toam or Tuen Archbishopricke, 100 Trimletstoun Baron, 95 Twomond Earles, 99 Tullo Vicount, 85 c. &c. f Turlogh Lenigh, 115 Tutes, 96 V VAlentia Baron, 76 Verdon, 97 Vernayle, 155 Ufford, 103 Vergivian Sea, 61 Vescy, 87 Vines why not in Britain, 63 Ulster, 104. Earles, 117 Upper Ossery Baron, 84 Uriaghts, 114 Ushant, 231 Ussher, 94 Uske-bah, 63 W WAlsh, 91 Warren, 86, 132 Waterford County, 79. Earles, 80 Weisford County 88 West Meath County, 96 Western Isles, 215 White Knight, 87 Wicklow, 89 Wicker boates, 59 Wolfmen, 83 Y YDron Baronie, 85 Ancient names of Places and Rivers in Ireland. ARgita flu. 117 Ausoba flu. 99 Auteri, 100 Birgus flu. 84 Boreum Prom. 117 Birgantes, or Brigantes, 84 Buvinda flu. 95 Cauci, 90 Conca i, 98 Coriondi, 77 Darnii neere Derrie, 104.116 Daurona, 78 Dunum, 109 Duri flu. 75 Eblana, 91 Eblani, 84 Erdini, 106 Gangani, 98 Hieron Prom. 89 Iberni, 76 Iernus flu. ibid. Isannium Prom. 109 Laberus, 94 Libnius flu. 91 Logia flu. 116 Luceni, 74 Macolicum, 97 Menapia, 89 Menapii, 84 Medona flu. 89 Nagnata, 102.103 Nagnata, ibid. Notium Prom. 76 Ovoca flu. 90 Ravius flu. 102 Rheba, 8 Rhobogdii, 115 Rhobogdium Prom. 116 Rigia, 97 Rigia altera, 116 Senus flu. 97 Velabri, 76 Vennicuium Prom. 117 Vennicnii, 115.117 Vidua flu. 117 Vinderus flu. 112 Vodiae, 77 Voluntii, 104 Ancient names of the Isles adjacent to Britaine. ACmodae, 220 Amnitum, See Samnitum insulae, 231 Adros called also Andium, 203 Axantos, See Uxantisa, 231 Barsa, 227 Bergae, 218 Birchanis, 221 Caesarea, 224 Cassiterides, 227 Caunos, 222 Dumna, 216 Ebudae, 215 Ebuda prima, 216 Ebuda secunda, ibid. Evodia, 214 Electridae, 220 Epidium, 215 Edri, 203 Fortunate Islands, 217 Glessariae, 220 Glotta, 22.214 Hebrides, 215 Hesperides, 228 Ieta, 223 Limnos, 203 Liga, 227 Lisia, ibid. Mictis, haply Vectis, 223 Menavia, 203, 205 Mona, 203 Monaeda, ibid. Mula, or Maleos, 215 Nerigon, 218 Nessiada, 231 Ocet , 216 Orcades, ibid. Pomona, ibid. Ricina, or Ricluna, 215 Sanitum insulae, 231 Sarnia, 225 Saxonum insulae, 221 Sena, 231 Siambis, ibid. Siade, 227 Sicdelis, ibid. Silimnus, 203 Silinae, 227 Tanatos, 222 Thule, 218 Toliapis, 222 Vecta or Vectis, 223 Venetica insulae, 231 Vindelis. Old Winchelsey. Uliarus, 232 Uxantisa, 231 FINIS.